  Polymer isolation and analyses
Leaf material, from plants grown in vitro or in pots, was
ground in liquid nitrogen and freeze-dried. The lyophilised
powder was washed with ethanol at 55 C for 48 h
to remove fatty acids and chlorophylls, and the hydrophobic
polymer was eventually solubilised from the defatted
powder with chloroform at 55 C for 48 h. The
washing and solubilisation steps were performed by
shaking powder and solvents (500 ml) in glass flasks.
During each step, the solvent was refreshed 3 times. The
volume of the chloroform fraction containing hydrophobic
compounds was reduced with a rotavapor, and
the concentrated solution was analysed by gas chromatography
(GC) after methanolysis (Lageveen et al.
1988 ). Methylesters were analysed by GC using a Carlo-
Erba GC6000 apparatus equipped with a 25 m CPSil5CB
capillary column (Chrompack).
 Peaks corresponding to the monomeric units of the
extracted polymer were identified by comparing their
retention times with those of the monomers present in
pure mcl-PHAs isolated from P. putida  KT2442
(monomer composition shown in Table 1 ).
 Polymer
quantities were determined from monomer peak areas in
GC analysis. Separation of the ??????polymer-containing??????
fraction from other lipid and monomeric components
was achieved using an Ultrafree CL filter column with
Ultracel-PL membrane, nominal molecular weight limit
(NMWL) 5,000 (Millipore), following the manufacturer???s
recommendations, and adapted to the purpose of
polymer separation. In short, clarified plant extracts
containing the polymer were resuspended in 2 ml of
acetone, applied to the column and centrifuged at
5,000 g  until the entire solution passed through the filter
(approximately 10 h). Filters were washed 4 times with
2 ml of acetone and the ??????polymer-containing?????? phase
(i.e. the fraction retained by the filter) and the ??????monomer-
containing?????? phase (i.e. the fraction that passed
through the filter) were finally resuspended in chloroform,
methanolysed and analysed by GC. A series of
controls were used to optimise the performance of the
filter columns: pure mcl-PHA control consisting of
polymer isolated from P. putida  KT2442; pure monomer
consisting of 3-(R )-hydroxyoctanoate obtained as described
elsewhere (de Roo et al. 2002 ) and kindly provided
by Guy de Roo; a mix of polymer and monomer.