Analytical methods
For the analysis of monomeric sugars, the fermentation
broth samples were centrifuged (3 min at 17,400??~g), and
the pH of the supernatant was adjusted to 5.0 with barium
carbonate using a pH indicator (Bromophenolblue) followed
by filtration of the liquid. The analysis was
performed by high-performance anion-exchange chromatography
using a Carbopack PA1 column (column temperature
of 30??C) and a pulsed amperometric detector (ED50;
Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Before injection, the
system was equilibrated with 25.5 mM NaOH for 10 min
at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min. For the separation of
monomeric sugars, at injection, the mobile phase was
shifted to deionized water for 30 min. Postcolumn addition
of sodium hydroxide was used for detection of the neutral
monomeric sugars.
The determination of soluble oligomeric sugars was
performed by centrifugation for 5 min at 3,000 rpm
(Centaur 2, Beun de Ronde, The Netherlands) of preweighed
samples and freeze drying the supernatant overnight.
Pellets were weighed and hydrolyzed with sulfuric
acid, and neutral monomeric sugars were determined
according to the method as described by van den Oever et
al. (2003). For the calculations, an average molecular
weight of oligomers from glucan and xylan of 166 and
132 g/mol, respectively, were applied, resulting in a
hydrolysis factor of 1.08 and 1.14, respectively.
For the analysis of insoluble polymeric sugars, samples
of 25 g were centrifuged for 5 min at 3,000 rpm (Centaur 2,
Beun de Ronde); the supernatant was removed, and the
pellet was washed by resuspension in 25 ml fresh
demineralized water followed by a centrifugation step of
5 min at 3,000 rpm (Centaur 2, Beun de Ronde). The
sequence of resuspension and centrifugation was repeated
three times. After the last removal of the supernatant, the
pellets were freeze dried overnight. The pellets were weighed
(values used for DM calculation), polymeric material was
hydrolyzed with sulfuric acid, and neutral sugars were
analyzed according to the method as described by van den
Oever et al. (2003). For the calculations, a molecular weight
of glucan and xylan of 162 and 132 g/mol, respectively, were
applied, resulting in a hydrolysis factor of polymer to
monomer of 1.11 and 1.14, respectively.
The analysis of organic acids was performed by highpressure
liquid chromatography according to the procedure
described by Maas et al. (2006).