 Materials and Methods
Materials. Apple pectin (degree of methyl-esterification
(DM) 70-75%, Fluka) was used to determine the rate of pectin
de-esterification. The mode of PME action was determined using
citrus pectin (DM 94%, galacturonic acid (w/w) 83.5%, Sigma).
Recombinant A. aculeatus PME was purified from a commercial
enzyme preparation (Novoshape, Novozymes, Denmark),
generally recognized as safe for use in food (14), by gel
filtration as described earlier (15). Fractions containing PME
activity were pooled.
Endo-PG from KluyVeromyces fragilis was kindly provided
by the Laboratory of Food Chemistry, Wageningen Universiteit,
The Netherlands. Deionized water (organic free, 18 M¿ resistance) wassupplied by a Simplicity Millipore water purification system.Monogalacturonic acid and polygalacturonic acid were purchasedfrom Fluka. Digalacturonic acid and trigalacturonic acidwere purchased from Sigma.MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry. MALDI-TOF-MS (matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight massspectrometry) was performed on a Reflex IV (Bruker DaltonicGmbH, Germany), equipped with a N2-laser and pulsed ionextraction accessory. The PME sample was concentrated byfiltration on centrifugal filters (10 kDa, Millipore Corporation;centrifugation conditions 13600g, 20 min, 4 °C). Subsequently,the initial volume was restored with deionized water, and thesample was concentrated again. This washing procedure wasperformed three times, and 1 íL of sample was transferred toa steel target, mixed with 1 íL of a 50 mM solution of R-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in acetone and air-dried. The instrumentwas calibrated using a standard peptide mixture (Bruker DaltonicGmbH, Germany). Positive ion spectra were recorded in thelinear mode.Titrimetric Assay of Pectin Methyl Esterase Activity. Atitrimetric assay for PME activity was used (1) to identify thefractions containing PME activity after gel-filtration, (2) tonormalize the initial rate of the enzymatic reaction (V0) atdifferent temperature and pressure combinations (see below),and (3) to determine the optimal temperature for PME activityat atmospheric pressure.The standard PME activity was measured titrimetrically atpH 4.5 and 22 °C on the basis of the release of acid as a functionof time. The reaction mixture in the standard assay consistedof 30 mL of apple pectin (3.5 g/L, 0.117 M NaCl) and 250 íLof PME sample. During hydrolysis of the ester linkage the pHwas maintained at 4.5 by automatic pH-stat titration (Titrino718, Metrohm, Switzerland) with 0.01 M NaOH. The PMEactivity is proportional to the rate of base consumption, correctedfor incomplete dissociation of the de-esterified carboxyl groupsby multiplying the activity with a factor [1 + 10(pKa-pH)], withpKa equal to 3.5, the pKa of galacturonic acid (16). To determinethe PME activity as a function of temperature, the substratesolution was preheated in the thermostated reaction vessel andthe enzyme sample was injected when the desired temperaturewas reached. Blanks (pectin without PME added) were takeninto account for every temperature. One unit (U) of PME activityis defined as the amount of enzyme capable of catalyzing thede-esterification of 1 ímol of methyl-ester bonds per minute atpH 4.5 and constant temperature (22 °C for the standard assay).This pH-stat procedure was also used to prepare partially deesterifiedpectin samples at 22 °C, 0.1 MPa, and pH 4.5 foranalysis of the distribution pattern of liberated carboxyl groups.Therefore, citrus pectin (30 mL, 4 g/L in deionized water) wasmixed with PME (40 U) in the reaction vessel of the automatictitrator. After preset times, 1.1 mL of the reaction mixture waswithdrawn and immediately heated at 80 °C for 5 min toinactivate PME. Afterward the samples were cooled in ice water,frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at - 40 °C. The residualDM of the respective samples could be estimated from the initialmass percentage of galacturonic acid and methoxy groups ofcitrus pectin and the amount of methoxy groups released. Thelatter was proportional to the amount of base that was titrated,multiplied with a factor [1 + 10(pKa-pH)] to correct for incompletedissociation of the carboxyl groups, with pKa equal to 3.5, thepKa of galacturonic acid.PME-Catalyzed Pectin Conversion at Isothermal-IsobaricConditions. Pectin de-esterification by recombinant A. aculeatusPME at isothermal and isothermal-isobaric conditions wasperformed as described by Verlent et al. (17). The enzymaticreaction was initiated by mixing PME (20 U for the treatmentsat 0.1 MPa, 3 U for the treatments at 300 MPa) and 30 mL ofpectin (4 g/L) in sodium acetate buffer (0.1 M, pH 4.5) atatmospheric pressure and room temperature. Together with eachPME-pectin sample, a blank sample containing pectin only wassubjected to an identical treatment.For isothermal treatments at atmospheric pressure, tubes werefilled with the mixture and placed in a temperature-controlledwater bath within 2 min. After an equilibration period of 3 minto allow the mixture to reach the desired temperature, a firstsample was withdrawn. The rest of the samples were removedfrom the water bath after preset time intervals. Enzymaticreaction in withdrawn samples was quenched by a heat shock(80 °C for 5 min) before cooling in ice water.Pectin conversion at elevated pressures was performed byenclosing flexible microtubes (Bioplastics, The Netherlands)filled with pectin-PME mixtures in the multivessel highpressureequipment. Pressure was built up slowly (100 MPa/min) to minimize adiabatic heating, and an equilibration period(3 min) was taken into account after reaching the desiredpressure to allow the temperature to evolve to the desired value.After preset time intervals individual vessels were depressurizedand samples were removed. Enzymatic reaction in withdrawnsamples was quenched by a heat shock (80 °C for 5 min) beforecooling in ice water.Determination of the Rate of PME-Catalyzed Pectin Deesterificationduring Pressure and/or Temperature Treatment,Based on the Methanol Formation. The PME activity(initial rate of pectin de-esterification) was determined byquantifying the release of methanol as a function of treatmenttime (17). The amount of methanol produced in the samples,subjected to (isobaric-)isothermal treatments as described above,was measured colorimetrically at 412 nm and 25 °C accordingto a method by Klavons and Bennett (18). To determine theamount of methanol released as a result of enzymatic deesterificationof pectin, the amount of methanol produced inblanks was subtracted from the amount of methanol producedin the PME-pectin mixtures. PME activity (V0 (ímol MeOH/(mL pectin solutionâmin)) was estimated from the initial, linearpart of the curve obtained by plotting the amount of methanolproduced by PME (V0) versus treatment time. To correct forpossible variations in the concentration of PME from differentgel-filtration runs, V0 was divided by the PME activitydetermined under standard assay conditions (measured titrimetricallyat 22 °C and pH 4.5). The normalized PME activityis denoted V0¢. The normalization procedure and the reproducibilityof the PME activity studies were tested by performingthree replicates of activity measurements with three differentconcentrations of PME (determined by the standard titrimetricassay: 1.8 U, 4.1 U, 6.4 U) at 25 °C and atmospheric pressure.The average normalized PME activity (V0¢) was found to be1.15 ( 0.09, yielding a standard error of less than 8%.Determination of the Mode of PME-Catalyzed Pectin Deesterificationduring Temperature and/or Pressure Treatment.The mode of de-esterification by PME was investigatedby characterizing the distribution of free carboxyl groups onthe pectin products by degradation of the pectin products byendo-polygalacturonase (endo-PG) from KluyVeromyces fragilisand analysis of the digests by high-performance size-exclusionchromatography and high-performance anion-exchange chromatography.The residual DM of PME-de-esterified sampleswas estimated from the initial mass percentage of galacturonic acid and methoxy groups of citrus pectin and the amount ofmethoxy groups released, determined by measuring colorimetricallythe methanol concentration in the sample (18).Digestion by endo-PG. Thawed pectin samples were adjustedto pH 5 using a 0.05 M acetate buffer by applying the followingsteps: centrifugation (12900 g, 20 °C, 40 min) of 500 íL pectinsample on centrifugal filters (10 kDa, Millipore Corporation,USA), addition of 300 íL acetate buffer, centrifugation andadjustment to the initial sample volume with 0.05 M sodiumacetate buffer pH 5.0.Subsequently, the pectin samples were digested by endo-PGfrom K. fragilis as described by Daas et al. (19). It is believedthat this enzyme requires a block of at least four unesterifiedgalacturonic acid residues to bind and depolymerize pectin (20).Pectin samples were incubated with 0.0225 units of endo-PGfor 24 h at 30 °C. One unit (U) of PG activity is defined as theamount of enzyme capable of catalyzing the release of 1 ímolof galacturonic acid per minute. Afterward, PG was inactivatedby heating at 100 °C for 5 min.High-Performance Size-Exclusion Chromatography. Highperformancesize-exclusion chromatography (HPSEC) wasperformed using a Dionex system (Dionex Bio-LC system,USA) equipped with a mixed bed column of Bio-Gel TSK (300mm  7.5 mm) (GMPWxl, Tosoh Corporation, Japan) incombination with a TSK guard column. A 25 íL sample ofpectin (diluted to 2 g/L with 0.1 M NaNO3, pH 6.9) wereinjected. Elution was executed at 35 °C with 0.05 M NaNO3pH 6.9 at a flow rate of 0.7 mL/min for 20 min. The eluentwas monitored using a Shodex R101 refractive index detector Showa Denko, K.K., Japan). Calibration was performed usingpullulan standards (MM range 188-788000) (Polymer Laboratories,USA). Monogalacturonic acid (100 ppm) was injectedbefore and after each set of samples to verify the reproducibility.High-Performance Anion-Exchange Chromatography.The degree of polymerization (DP) of the galacturonic acidoligomers obtained after digestion of pectin by endo-PG wasanalyzed by high-performance anion-exchange chromatography(HPAEC; Dionex Bio-LC system, USA) at pH 12 as describedby Verlent et al. (21), using a CarboPac PA1 column with guard.Detection was achieved using pulsed amperometric detection(PAD) with a gold working electrode. Prior to injection, PGtreatedpectins were diluted to 2 g/L with 0.2 M NaOH. Due tothe high pH, all methyl-ester groups were de-esterified instantaneouslywhen the samples were diluted in NaOH. Consequently,separation of the pectin fragments was based only ontheir degree of polymerization and not on their residual degreeor pattern of methyl-esterification. The elution times of themono-, di-, and trimer of galacturonic acid were identified byrunning standard solutions. The elution times of other galacturonicacid oligomers were determined by comparison of theelution profile of the digested pectin with the profile ofpolygalacturonic acid digested by endo-PG. It should be notedthat the PAD detector could not provide analysis beyond adegree of polymerization (DP) of 10 and that the sensitivity ofthe detector varies with the oligomers according to their DP.Monogalacturonic acid (40 ppm) was injected before and aftereach set of samples to verify the reproducibility.