Material and methods
Materials
Algae soluble protein isolate (ASPI) (53% [w/w] protein) was isolated from the commercially available microalgae Tetraselmis sp. (Reed Mariculture, Campbell, CA, USA) as described previously (Schwenzfeier et al., 2011). All chemicals used were of analytical grade and purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA) or Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) if not stated otherwise. Proteinase K (order no. 92905, 825 U/mg) from Fluka (Ronkonkoma, NY, USA) was used for hydrolysis experiments.
Fractionation of ASPI
Fractionation of ASPI was carried out using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units equipped with 50 kDa MWCO regenerated cellulose membranes (Merck). Prior to fractionation, 2.5 g ASPI were dissolved in 250 mL demineralized water, stirred overnight at 4 C and centrifuged (20 C, 20 min, 4500  g). The ASPI solution (10 mL) was added to a filter unit previously washed with 5 mL demineralized water. Subsequently, fractionation was carried out by centrifugation (20 C, 20 min, 4500  g). The fractionation step was repeated three times by adding 10 mL ASPI solution to the remaining retentate in the filter unit. Next to a filtrate (ASPI-S) and a retentate (ASPI-UA), a pellet (ASPI-P) developed during the repeated addition of ASPI solution onto the already obtained retentate (Fig. 1). The pellet most probably developed due to protein precipitation from the intensely concentrated, proteinsaturated ASPI(-R). After the actual fractionation the material remaining in the filter units was washed three times with 7 mL demineralized water (20 C, 20 min, 4500  g). The wash filtrate obtained was combined with the actual filtrate obtained during fractionation. To obtain sufficient material for subsequent experiments, the fractionationwas performed in parallel using eight filter units. The three final fractions obtained from each filter were pooled, freeze dried, weighed and stored at 20 C until further analysis.
Compositional analysis
All samples used for compositional analysis were freeze dried prior to analysis and stored at 50 C until compositional analysis was performed to prevent adsorption of additional water. Chloroform/ methanol (2:1 v/v) extractable material was determined gravimetrically after exhaustive extraction of freeze-dried samples by Soxhlet extraction followed by solvent evaporation. All analyses mentioned were carried out at least in duplicate. 2.3.1. Amino acid composition and protein content
Amino acid composition analysis (Moore & Stein, 1963) was carried out in duplicate using samples from independent fractionation experiments by Ansynth Service BV (Berkel en Roodenrijs, The Netherlands). Standard deviations were found to be on average < 1% of the mean. In a single case the standard deviation was 19% (tryptophan in ASPI-UA). Protein contents of ASPI and its fractions were calculated as the sum of amino acid residue weights. For soluble fractions, protein concentrations were also determined with the Pierce BCA protein assay according to the producer’s instructions (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). BSA was used as standard.
All protein content determinations were at least carried out in duplicate.
Sugar composition, total neutral sugar and total uronic acid contents Sugar compositionwas determined according to De Ruiter, Schols, Voragen, and Rombouts (1992). Samples were dried at 40 C under vacuum over P2O5 and hydrolyzed with 2 N HCl in dry methanol for 16 h at 80 C followed by evaporation and subsequent 2 M
TFA hydrolysis at 121 C for 1 h. Monomeric sugars were analyzed using high-performance anion-exchange chromatography  pulsed amperometric detection (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) analysis as described previously (Sengkhamparn, Verhoef, Schols, Sajjaanantakul, & Voragen, 2009). Total neutral sugar contents
were determined with the orcinol-sulfuric acid colour assay (Tollier & Robin, 1979) and uronic acids contents with the m-hydroxydiphenyl assay (Ahmed & Labavitch,1978), both using an automated colorimetric assay analyser. As standards galactose or glucose (25e 200 mg/mL) and galacturonic acid (12.5e100.0 mg/mL) were used,
respectively. 
Size exclusion chromatography
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was performed on a ÄKTA micro liquid chromatography system equipped with a Superose 6 column (both GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). The samples (50 mL, w10 mg/mL protein) were eluted with 50 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 8) containing 150 mM NaCl at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min at room temperature. Elution was monitored by UV detection at 280 nm (internal detector) and by refractive index detection (Shodex RI150, Showa Denko K.K., Tokyo, Japan). Apparent molecular weights were estimated using a high molecular weight gel filtration calibration kit (GE Healthcare).
SDS-PAGE
The protein composition of the different ASPI fractions was analysed using SDS-PAGE analysis under reducing conditions (10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) on a Mini-protean II system (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the instructions of the
manufacturer. Gels were stained with either Coomassie brilliant
blue (CBB) or Periodic acideSchiff’s reagent (PAS). Precision Plus
Protein Dual Colors Standard (Biorad) was used as molecular
weight marker in all gels.
Protein hydrolysis
Hydrolysis of the proteins present in ASPI and all its fractions was performed by Proteinase K using a pH-stat. Proteinase K has been tested for the absence of side activities on cell wall polysaccharides. For hydrolysis, 10 mL ASPI solution (5 mg/mL) were preheated to 40 C in the temperature controlled pH-stat. Subsequently,
the pH was adjusted to pH 8 with 0.2 M NaOH and next 10 mL of a 10 mg/mL proteinase K solution was added. The pH was kept constant by the pH-stat (pH 8.0) during 3 h of Proteinase K incubation. The obtained hydrolysate was analysed with SEC as described above without any further dilution.
 Automated drop tensiometry
Automated drop tensiometry was carried out as described previously (Schwenzfeier, Lech, et al., 2013), dilatational rheological propertieswere measured using a deformation of the interfacial area with 5% at a frequency of 0.1 Hz. In this study 0.1 mg/mL ASPI, ASPIUA, ASPI-S and ASPI-P solutions were prepared by suspending each isolate in 10mMNaCl solutionand adjusted topH7 orpH5 at least 1 h before measurements. If necessary, the pH was readjusted to the respectivepHafter dissolving the isolate by addition of 0.05MHCl. All samplesweremeasured in duplicate using the same protein solution.
Foam preparation and stability
To study the influence of pH on foam stability, the pH of solutions of ASPI and its fractions (0.5 mg/mL in 10 mM NaCl) was adjusted to values ranging from 3 to 7 with 1 unit intervals using small amounts of 1MHCl or 5MNaOH. After stirring for at least 1 h at 20 C the solutions were centrifuged (5 min, 4500  g, 20 C).
Foams were prepared by sparging N2 through 40 mL of the solution at a flow rate of 830 mL/min through the metal grid of the foam beaker as described elsewhere (Wierenga, van Norél, & Basheva, 2009). When the foam height had reached 12 cm, the gas flow was stopped and the foam height was recorded as function of time.
In order to compare the data obtained to the data reported previously (Schwenzfeier, Lech, et al., 2013), in this study t5/6, the time in which the foam height decreased from 12 cm to 10 cm, is used as a parameter to describe foam stability. The foam was defined as stable if 12 cm foam height could be reached. For stable foams foam
stability was expressed as the t5/6-value relative to the t5/6-value of the foam prepared at pH 7; hence the latter was set as 100%.
 Emulsion preparation and stability
Prior to emulsion preparation 0.2 g ASPI, ASPI-S, ASPI-UA or ASPI-P were each suspended in 18 g of 10 mM NaCl solution. The solutions were stirred for at least 1 h at 20 C resulting in solutions of pH 7.6 (ASPI), pH 7.9 (ASPI-S), pH 7.0 (ASPI-UA) and pH 7.2 (ASPIP), which were used without any further pH adjustment. To obtain emulsions containing 10% (w/w) sunflower oil and 1% (w/w) of the respective ASPI fraction, 2 g sunflower oil was added to all solutions. All emulsions were made from pre-emulsions (Ultra-Turrax at 9500 rpm for 1 min) further passed 10 times through a laboratory homogenizer (LH-scope HU-3.0, Delta Instruments, Drachten, The Netherlands) at a pressure of 100 bar. The pH of the emulsions was adjusted to pH 7.0 directly after preparation with 0.1M or 1.0M HCl, if necessary. The influence of pH on emulsion stability was determined by adjusting the pH of the initial emulsion to values ranging from 3 to 6 with 1 unit intervals using 0.1 or 1.0 M HCl. To study the influence of ionic strength on emulsion stability, the salt concentration of the emulsion was adjusted by adding 1 part of a 2 M NaCl solution to 9 parts of the initial emulsion.
Droplet size determination
Droplet size distributions and volume surface mean diameters (d32) of the emulsions were determined by static light scattering (DLS), as well as by diffusing wave spectroscopy (DWS). DLS was performed using a Mastersizer (Hydro 2000SM, Malvern Instruments, Malvern,UK) at roomtemperature.Arefractive index ratio of 1.1 was used to calculate the particle size distribution. Diffusing wave spectroscopy (DWS) was used additionally, to quantify emulsion instability independent of the effects of dilution and mechanical deformation introduced in the Mastersizer. DWS was carried out in transmission and forward scattering geometry using a HeNe laser (JDS Uniphase, l . 633 nm) (Ruis, Van Gruijthuijsen, Venema, & Van Der Linden, 2007).Autocorrelationcurveswere recorded for120s in5 sequential runs.The average over all5measurementswasnormalized by dividing g2(t) e 1 values obtained by the maximum value measured. Normalized autocorrelation curves were fitted assuming that the equation used by Ruis, et al. (2007) to describe the autocorrelation function can be simplified to:

In this equation g2(t) is the autocorrelation function of multiple scattered light as function of time t and <Dr2(t)> is the mean square displacement of the scatters. For unhindered diffusive
colloidal motion <Dr2(t)> . 6Dt, with D representing the selfdiffusion coefficient. According to Ruis et al. (2007) the short time behaviour of <Dr2(t)> can be described as <Dr2(t)> z tp. This approximation allows to describe the autocorrelation function using the simplified parameters a . 12D and x . p. The decay time s1/ 2, which is defined as the time at which g2 (s1/2) 1 decayed to half of its initial value, was determined using the fitted equation. An increase of the decay time is related to decreased droplet mobility (Blijdenstein, Hendriks, Van der Linden, Van Vliet, & Van Aken, 2003; Vasbinder, van Mil, Bot, & de Kruif, 2001).
 z-potential measurements
The z-potential of the emulsion droplets was determined using a particle electrophoresis instrument (Zetasizer, Nano series e ZS, Malvern). Prior to analysis, the emulsions were diluted 500 in 10 mM NaCl at the pH of the respective emulsion and equilibrated for 5 min at 25 C inside the instrument. Data was collected over at least 5 sequential readings and processed using the Smoluchowski model (Hunter, 2001).
 Light microscopy
Qualitative detection of droplet aggregation was carried out by microscopic observation after 100 dilution in 10 mM NaCl at the pH of the respective emulsion. If aggregated droplets were observed, microscopic examination was repeated after diluting the emulsion 1:1 in 0.5% (w/v) SDS.