Materials and methods
ngredients
Sunflower oil was refined winterized sunflower oil (RWSFO) donated by Cargill BV (The Netherlands). Lysozyme HCl (batch 1378; >99.0% protein)was kindly donated by Belovo S.A. (Bastogne, Belgium). Whey protein isolate (WPI, Bipro, 97.8% protein) was obtained from Davisco Foods International (USA). Guar gum powder (Hansacoll) and vanilla flavour (vanilla flavouring powder T03912; containing 25% nature-identical vanillin and maltodextrin ex maize as a carrier) were a gift from Brenntag Specialties (The Netherlands) and Danisco Holland BV (The Netherlands), respectively. Sugar (CSM, The Netherlands) and NaCl (NEZO, Akzo Nobel, The Netherlands) were purchased from a local retailer.
Emulsion preparation
An overview of the emulsions is given in Table 1. The emulsions were provided with a more pleasant taste by the addition of sucrose and vanilla flavour. All products had a neutral pH (6.7) and contained 0.058 wt% NaCl, 0.033 wt% vanilla flavouring powder (corresponding to 8.25 ppm vanillin) and 2 wt% sucrose based on
aqueous phase. The emulsions were prepared under clean and hygienic conditions 1 day before panel evaluation and stored at 4–7 C.
Whey protein (WPI)-based emulsions
Briefly, WPI was dissolved in continuous phase containing 0.058 wt% NaCl, 2 wt% sucrose and 0.033 wt% vanilla flavouring powder, at room temperature under continuously gentle stirring. The pH was, when necessary, adjusted to 6.7 with hydrochloric acid
or sodium hydroxide. Stock emulsions contained 40 wt% sunflower oil, 1 wt% WPI (not corrected for purity of the protein). The preemulsion was prepared by mixing oil into a protein solution using a rotor–stator type mixer at 4500 min1 (Ultra Turrax, IKA, T25- basic, Germany). This pre-emulsion was homogenized through a Panda homogenizer (Panda 2K, Niro Soavi S.p.A., Parma Italy) at 20 bar for the first step and 200 bar for the second step of homogenization to obtain emulsions with a droplet size of about 1 mm.
The stock emulsionwas diluted with continuous phase (without protein) to 10% oil (emulsion #3; W10L) or 2.5% oil (emulsion #7; W2.5L_lowP) as listed in Table 1. Emulsion #7 had both a reduced oil and protein content compared to emulsion #3. Based on the assumption that 2 mg/m2 protein was adsorbed on the oil droplets surface (1 mm droplets (Blijdenstein, van Vliet, van der Linden, & Van Aken, 2003; Hunt & Dalgleish, 1994), it was calculated that the protein concentration in the continuous phase of emulsion #3 was 0.14 wt%. This assumption was later confirmed by protein determination
in the continuous phase. In emulsion #5 (W2.5L), the protein content in the continuous phase was kept similar as in emulsion #3 by dilution emulsion #3 four times with continuous phase containing 0.14 wt% WPI. A guar gum solution was prepared (1 wt%) by dissolving guar gum, vanilla flavour, sucrose and NaCl in cold water, heating the dispersion to 70 C and subsequently cooling down. Then the pH was brought to 6.7 with sodium hydroxide. To prepare emulsion #1 (W10H), the stock emulsion was diluted with guar gum dissolved continuous phase to a concentration of 10% oil and 0.4 wt% guar (in the continuous phase).
ysozyme-emulsions
Lysozyme was dissolved in continuous phase at pH 5.5 at room temperature and then brought to pH 6.7 with sodium hydroxide. Emulsion preparation was similar as described above for WPIemulsions, except that the stock emulsion contains 20% oil and 1 wt% lysozyme. The stock emulsion was diluted with continuous phase (without
protein) to 10% oil (emulsion #4; L10L) or 2.5% oil (emulsion #8; L2.5L_lowP) as listed in Table 1. Emulsion #8 had both a reduced oil and protein content compared to emulsion #4. Similar to the approach for WPI-emulsions, assuming that 2 mg/m2 protein was
adsorbedonthe oil droplets surface, itwas calculated that the protein concentration in the continuous phase of emulsion #4was 0.42 wt%. This assumptionwas later confirmed by measurements. The protein content of the continuous phases of emulsions #4 and #6 was kept similar by dilution emulsion #4 four times with continuous phase containing 0.42 wt% lysozyme. The guar gum thickened lysozymeemulsion (emulsion #2; L10H) was prepared according to the same procedure as described for the WPI-emulsions. 2.3. Emulsion characterization Samples, diluted to 10% oil content, were analysed by light microscopy
(Olympus BX 60 Microscope equipped with an Olympus DP 70 camera; Olympus Nederland BV, The Netherlands) at 10 and 50 magnification. The volume-over-surface averaged diameter (d3,2) and droplet size distribution (d4,3) were determined after dilution in demineralised water (dilution factor about 3000) by laser diffraction with
the Mastersizer Hydro 2000S (Malvern Instruments, Southborough, UK). A refractive index of 1.469 (sunflower oil)was used to calculate the particle size distribution according to the Mie theory. Rheological measurements were carried out at 20 C with Paar Physica MCR 300 using a cone–plate geometry CP75-1, with a cone angle of 1 (0.0175 rad) and a gap width of 0.05 mm(at the tip). The shear rate, g_ , was increased in 40 steps from 1 to 1500 s1. At each shear rate the measuring time was 10 s. Measurements were performed in duplicate. Viscoelastic behaviour measurements were carried out using the Vilastic-3 viscoelasticity analyzer (Vilastic Scientific Inc., Austin, TX, USA) as described previously (Silletti, 2008; Silletti, Vingerhoeds, Van Aken, & Norde, in press). Measurements were performed in duplicate using oscillatory flow at a frequency of 2 Hz in a measurement tube with the dimension of 63.97 mm in length and 5.04 mm in diameter, according to manufacturer’s guidelines for low viscous systems. The selected set up allowed measuring the storage (G0) and loss moduli (G00) in the deformation range between 0.002 and 19 and viscosity (h) in the shear rate range between 0.01 and 250 s1 and with small sample volumes Emulsions were also characterized after spitting out orally processed samples. Oral processing of 4 ml portions of the emulsions was done for 15 s by moving the tongue approximately 15 times up and down. Then the samples were carefully spat out in pre-weighed cups and directly characterized with respect to microscopy and rheology as described above for emulsion characterization. Microbial analysis, performed at Silliker BV (Ede, The Netherlands) of the emulsions on the day of panel evaluation, showed negligible counts for aerobic mesophilic germination number, Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus aureus and Listeria monocytogenes.
Emulsion retention on the tongue surface
The term oral retention denotes the presence of the compound of interest on oral surfaces after oral processing (De Jongh & Janssen, 2007). Retention of emulsion droplets on the tongue surface was determined qualitatively using different techniques. Before
taking tongue swabs emulsions were orally processed as described above. After spitting out of the emulsion, the mouth was rinsed twice with 20 ml water. Then, a sample was taken from the whole tongue surface with a pre-moistened cotton swab (100 mlwater). As a control, a sample of the clean tongue was taken with a premoistened swab (100 ml water). The swabs were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 40 C. Oil was extracted from the swab with a hexane–isopropanol mixture (6:4). C17 was added as an internal standard. After saponification with 0.5 M methanolic alkali solution the fatty acids were methylated with BF3 and extracted with a saturated salt solution
(Metcalfe, Schmitz, & Pelka, 1966). The fatty acid methylesters were separated by gas chromatography (6890 N GC-system from Agilent Technologies, Inc, Santa Clara, CA, USA), using a 25 m WCOT fused silica column (inside diameter 0.25 mm)coated with 0.2 mmCPWax
58 (Chrompack, Middelburg, The Netherlands). The carrier gas was hydrogen gas and 0.5 ml sample was splitless injected at a temperature of 275 C. The initial temperature and time were 60 C and 1.5 min, respectively. The temperature was increased as follows: 30 C/min until 180 C, 1.2 C/min until 215 C, and 40 C/min tot 275 C. The concentrations of fatty acids were calculated in relation to the internal standard (C17). The total amount of the fatty acids gives the amount of oil present in the swab. In addition, ATR–FTIR spectroscopy (Bio-Rad FTS 6000, USA) was used to analyse the swabs with respect to oil content. To the swabs, 10 ml of silicon oil solution in chloroform (10 mg/ml; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany, cat 7742) was added as internal standard to reduce the inaccuracy introduced by transfer of the sample from the swab onto a germanium crystal (1 8 cm). The chloroform facilitates homogeneous distribution of the silicon oil over the swab. Sunflower oil displays a sharp vibration band at 1750 cm1 due to the ester bond in lipids, whereas silicon oil displays a sharp vibration band at 800 cm1 due to the carbon silicon bond in the Si(CH3)2 group. To normalize the sample, the height of the sunflower oil peak at 1750 cm1 is divided by the height of the silicon oil peak at 800 cm1 (H1750/H800). Spectra were accumulated in the spectral region of 4000–700 cm1 with a spectral resolution of 2 cm1, using a speed of 5 kHz, a filter of 1.2 kHz and UDR of 2. SDS electrophoresis was carried out according to Laemlli (Laemmli, 1970). Proteins were extracted from the swab by adding 100 ml of 2% SDS. The samples were vigorously mixed and left for 30 min at RT. Before centrifugation (5000g, 20C, 20 min) the swabs were put upside down in their tubes. The obtained extracts were weighted. Then, the samples were reduced with b-mercaptoethanol and run on a 4–20% gradient gel (Pierce, USA, cat no. 25244) with 0.1 M Tris, 0.1 M HEPES, 3 mM SDS pH 8 (Pierce, USA, cat no. 28398) as the running buffer. The gels were stained for proteins with the PageBlue Fast protein staining (Fermentas; Canada,
abbreviated as CBB staining). The protein bands were quantified using image analysis software (Quantity One, Bio-Rad, USA). Western blotting was performed to determine mucins using a MUC5B (mAbF2) antibody (Veerman et al., 1997) and a MUC7 (CpMG2) antibody (Bolscher et al., 1999). Briefly, after SDS electrophoresis,
each sample was transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Bio-Rad, USA) andwashed with Tris buffered saline (TBS; 0.02 M Tris, 0.15 M NaCl pH 7.6). Membranes were incubated at room temperature (RT) for 1 h with a block solution containing 3% bovine serum albumin, 1% casein in TBS, and then washed with TBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 (TTBS). Subsequently, the membranes were incubated with a primary antibody against MUC5B (1:50) and against MUC7 (1:1000) overnight at 4 C under gentle agitation. Then, after washing with TTBS, the membranes were incubated (2 h, RT) with secondary antibodies, i.e. polyclonal alkaline phosphatase (AP)-Rabbit anti-Mouse IgG (Zymed, USA)
and AP-Goat anti-Rabbit IgG (Dako, Denmark), respectively, in a dilution of 1:2000. After washing, the membranes were stained with BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate) and NBT (nitrobluetetrazolium) substrate (Sigma, USA). Protein and peptide composition were also qualitatively assayed by SELDI–TOF Mass Spectrometry (Schipper et al., 2007). Swabs were brushed over the spot surface of a normal phase Protein Chip (NP20, Bio-Rad, USA). The spots were washed with 4 ml Milli Q water and air dried. Subsequently, 0.8 ml matrix solution (12.5 mg Sinapinic acid per ml 50% acetonitril/0.1% trifluoracetic acid) was added twice to the spots and air dried prior to reading on a Protein Chip Reader IIC instrument (Bio-Rad, USA).
Sensory analysis – subjects
The sensory properties of the emulsions were investigated with the use of a paid sensory panel trained according to the principles of Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDA) (Stone & Sidel, 2004). The panel consisted of nine female panellists, with a mean age of 48.1 years (standard deviation 9.4 years; range 30–60 years). All subjects had previously been screened to exclude taste disorders and to select on good olfactory senses. The panellists did not have a scientific background and were informed that the study aimed to evaluate the effect of saliva on perception. An informed consent form was signed at the first training session to confirm the awareness of the presence and possible risks of lysozyme in some of the products. Testing took place at the sensory facilities of the Centre for Innovative Consumer Studies, Agrotechnology and Food Sciences Group, Wageningen UR, The Netherlands.
Sensory analysis – procedure
The panellists, trained on low viscosity emulsions in at least four training sessions of 1.5–2 h (Vingerhoeds et al., 2008), received two extra training sessions to familiarize with the specific emulsions for this study. The panel evaluation started at 13 h. To minimize individual differences due to varying saliva properties, the panellists was asked not to consume any coffee or tea starting 2 h before the panel test and not to eat at least 1 h before the panel test. The panel judged the set of model emulsions in a semi-monadic assessment procedure in duplicate (two sessions). Presentation order was randomly designed over panellists (optimally balanced design for order and carry over effects; balanced Latin square design). Each session started with a warm-up sample, excluded from the data analysis. Then, per session eight products were tasted in three blocks with short breaks in between (5–10 min), resulting in a session duration of approximately 70 min. The products were poured in 60 cc cups, covered with a lid, at least 60 min before start
of the test. All samples were offered at room temperature. Panellists were seated in sensory booths in slightly red light and slight over-pressure to cancel out carrying over effects of odour residuals. During profiling, the attributes, which were generated in Dutch and subsequently translated in English (Table 2), appeared per category on a monitor placed in front of the panellist with the attributes on the left and a 100-point response scale anchored at the extremes on the right (Fizz software, Biosystems, v2.21a, 2006). Sensory attributes were assessed in the chronological order they are perceived. The panellists used a mouse to indicate the perceived strength of each attribute on the visual analogue scales. The
panellist smelled the product upon opening of the cup (odour attributes; O), and then took at least three 4 ml portions using a 5 ml-syringe. After evaluation of taste (T) and mouth feel (M) attributes, the product was carefully spat out and after taste (AT) and after feel (AF) attributes were judged. Between each product evaluation, the panellists cleaned the mouth with cream crackers, tap water, and optionally warm tap water.
Sensory analysis – data analysis
Data analyses were carried out using Fizz calculations (Biosystems, v2.20 h 2006), SPSS (version 12.01, SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA) and Unscrambler (version 7.5, Camo Inc., Corvallis, USA). The effect of emulsifier, oil content, or guar gum addition, on sensory attributes was analysed uni-variately using a repeated measures ANOVA (SPSS) with the Huynh–Feldt value as epsilon, carried out on the sensory data averaged across replicates. In addition, Analysis of Variance was applied to all sensory attributes separately, to test any differences between the products for statistical significance (Fizz). In case of significant differences, a post hoc test Least Significant Difference (LSD) was performed at 95% confidence interval to reveal the nature of the differences (Fizz). Correlation analysis (p< 0.05; Excel) was carried out between instrumental measurements and sensory attributes. Principal component analysis (PCA)was carried out using panel averaged data (Unscrambler) to identify relations betweenproducts, attributes and instrumental measurements to elucidate the configuration of products in the perceptual space as defined by the first two principal components.