 Materials and Methods
A. Materials. The pectin samples were produced by
Degussa Texturant Systems, Redon, France. Three citrus
pectin samples, A, B, and C, with about the same DM but
differing in their degree of blockiness (DB) were investigated,
see Table 1.20 Pectins A and B originate from the same lemon
variety. The MW of the samples, determined with highperformance
size exclusion chromatography (HPSEC), were
 82 kDa for pectins A and C and 78 kDa for pectin B.
 B. Uronic Acid Content. Pectins (60 íg/mL) were boiled
(1 h), cooled, and then saponified with sodium hydroxide
(40 mM). The uronide content was determined by the
automated colorimetric m-hydroxydiphenyl method.21-23
 C. Degree of Blockiness. The pectins were digested with
polygalacturonase of KluiVeromyces fragilis (PGkf) which
needs 4 or more free GalA to act. Degradation products were
analyzed by HPAEC at pH 5.20,24 Quantification of these
oligomers is possible by integration from HPAEC pH 5
elution profiles. From these results, the degree of blockiness
was determined25,26 (Table 1). A high DB value is indicative
for the release of a high number of mono-, di-, and tri-GalA
and thus for a blockwise distribution of nonesterified
galacturonic acid residues in a pectin.
 D. Sample Preparation. The pectin concentration was
0.75% and sucrose concentration 60% for all samples. The
pectins were dissolved in 0.1 M citrate buffer at pH 3.0 or
pH 3.5 and stirred at room temperature for 2 h. The samples
were then heated to boiling point in an oil bath with a
temperature of 115 °C. Sucrose was added to the samples,
after which a preheated solution of CaCl2 in citrate buffer
was added to the samples containing Ca2+. The samples were
heated to boiling point, and the weight was adjusted with
distilled water. To prepare them for microscopy, the samples
were poured into cylindrical moulds of stainless steel and
stored at 20 °C in a water bath.
 E. Rheological Measurements. The rheological properties
during the gel formation were characterized by oscillatory
measurements in a strain-controlled Bohlin VOR Rheometer
(Bohlin Rheology, Chichester, U.K.) equipped with a
concentric cylinder with a volume of 25 mL. The boiling
samples were rapidly poured into the rheometer cup, temperature
conditioned to 20 °C. The bob was lowered, and
the surface of the sample was covered with paraffin oil to
avoid evaporation. The temperature of 20 °C was obtained
7 min after the measurement started. The gel formation
measurements were performed at a frequency of 1 Hz and a
strain of 2  10-3 for 3 and 20 h. The rheological
measurements were conducted in three replicates, except the
20 h measurements which were conducted in two replicates.
 F. Microscopy. Small gel cubes 1  1  1 mm were
carefully cut from the bulk gels 4 and 20 h after gel
preparation. The gels were fixed in an aldehyde solution,
based on citrate buffer, 2% glutaraldehyde, and 0.1%
ruthenium red. Two different citrate buffers, both at pH 3.0,
were used for fixation depending on the composition of the
gel samples: (I) citrate buffer with 50% sucrose and (II)
citrate buffer with 50% sucrose and the same concentration
of CaCl2âH2O as in the gel. The gel cubes were placed in
the fixation solution for 2 h. The samples were rinsed twice
in a buffer solution for 15 min. The samples were dehydrated
with ethanol, and the acrylic resin was dehydrated with LR
white (for details, see previous work).15 The polymerization
of LR white was obtained at 60 °C for about 20 h. Thin
sections (70-80 nm) were cut with a diamond knife. The
sections were transferred to Formvar-supported gold grids
and stained with periodic acid, thiosemicarbazide, and silver
proteinate.27 The samples were examined with a transmission
electron microscope (LEO 906E, LEO Electron Microscopy
Ltd., Cambridge England) at 80 kV. Each microscopy
preparation was conducted in two replicates and the conclusions
of the microscopy results were based on a large number
of TEM images.