 2. Materials and methods
2.1. Bacterial strains, construction of negative mutants,
media and growth conditions
The strains used in this study are listed in Table 1.
They were grown either in M17 medium (Terzaghi &
Sandine, 1975) supplemented with 0.5% (wt vol1)
lactose or in buffered (75mm b-glycerophosphate) milk
reconstituted with NILAC milkpowder (NIZO, Ede,
Netherlands) at 10% (wt vol1) in distilled sterilised
water. When necessary, 5 mgmL1 erythromycin was
added.
All the constructions were made in the L. lactis subsp.
cremoris strain TIL46 derived from NCDO763 and have
already been described. The araT mutant (TIL313) was
constructed by disruption of the araT gene by a single
homologous recombination with the integrative vector
pTag containing a 1-kb fragment of araT (Rijnen et al.,
1999a). The bcaT mutant (TIL357) was constructed by
double homologous recombination using pGhost9 containing
an internal fragment of bcaT (Chambellon &
Yvon, 2003). The double araT and bcaT mutant
(TIL358) was constructed from the bcaT mutant in
which the araT gene was disrupted as described above
(Chambellon & Yvon, 2003).
2.2. Cheese model trials
Amino acid catabolism and formation of volatile
compounds were studied under cheese ripening conditions
using the Ch-easy model (Smit, Braber, van
Spronsen, van den Berg, & Exterkate, 1995). For amino
acid catabolism and free amino acid analysis, the trials  were performed in small sterile tubes containing
27 0.05 g of cheese paste as described by Rijnen,
Courtin, Gripon, and Yvon (2000) . For volatile
compound analysis, the trials were performed using
200 g of cheese paste.
For each strain, resting cells, grown in milkand
washed as described by Rijnen et al. (2000) , were added
aseptically to the cheese paste at a concentration of
5 109  cells g1 . Control cheeses contained water
instead of cell suspension. An a -KG solution (15 mg g1
 paste) was added to one-half of the trials carried out
with each strain. To monitor amino acid catabolism,
radiolabelled valine (Val), leucine (Leu), methionine
(Met) and phenylalanine (Phe) (10 m Ci g1  in 50 m l) were
added into different tubes of cheese paste as previously
described (Rijnen et al., 2000 ). The paste mixture was
homogenised before incubation at 13 C, and all
analyses were performed at zero time and after 4 weeks
incubation. All cheese model experiments were carried
out in duplicate using cells harvested from separate
cultures except the experiments for volatile compounds
analysis, which was carried out only once. Volatile
compounds were analysed in duplicate from one cheese
sample.
2.3. Microbiological analysis
 Microbiological analysis was performed before incubation
and after 4 weeks incubation. For this purpose,
2.5mL of Ringer was added to 2 g of Ch-easy and the
mixture was homogenised with an ultraturrax disperser
at 11,000 rpm for 45 s. The mixture was then adjusted to
20mL and cell enumeration was done on M17 medium
containing 5 m gmL1  erythromycin when necessary.
2.4. Analysis of cheese model for radiolabelled
metabolites, free amino acid content, a-KG and volatile
compounds
 Radiolabelled metabolites were extracted and analysed
as previously described (Yvon et al., 1998 ). a -KG
and free amino acid contents were determined as
previously described with minor modifications (Yvon
et al., 1998 ). Volatile compounds were identified using
purge-and-trap thermal desorption cold-trap (TDCT)
gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS).
Cheese paste was mixed with double distilled water
(1:3 wt:vol) and homogenised and subsequently 20mL
of this mixture was purged with 150mLmin1  helium
gas for 30 min at room temperature. The volatile
compounds were trapped on an absorbent trap containing
carbotrap (80 mg, 20–40 mesh, Supelco, Belle Fonte,
PA, USA) and carbosieve SIII (10 mg, 60–80 mesh,
Supelco). The trapped compounds were transferred onto
a capillary column of a gas chromatograph using a
ChrompackPTI injector (Chrompack, Middelburg, The
Netherlands) in the TCDT mode, by heating the trap for
10 min at 250 C. A narrow injection band was achieved
by cryofocusing at  100 C. The conditions for the
chromatographic separation and mass spectrometry
were as described previously (Engels, 1997 ). Structures
were assigned by spectrum interpretation, comparison
of the spectra with bibliographic data and comparison
with retention times of reference compounds.
Quantification of components was performed using a
gas chromatograph equipped with a flame ionisation
detector (GC-FID) (FID 40, Carlo Erba, Milan, Italy)
as described by Ayad, Verheul, Wouters, and Smit
(2000) . Sulphur compounds were analysed in duplicate
by head space GC analysis using an FPD detector
(Carbo Erba, Milan, Italy) as described by de Jong,
Neeter, Boelrijk, and Smit (2000) . For quantification the
average peakareas and the deviations were determined.