 Materials and methods
 Glycinin purification
Glycinin was purified from William’s 82 soybeans (harvest 1994). Milling and defatting of the soybeans was performed according to Lakemond, de Jongh, Hessing, Gruppen, and Voragen (2000a). Glycinin was extracted and purified according to a modified method of Thanh & Shibasaki (1976). First a soy protein isolate was obtained  from defatted soy by alkaline extraction at pH 8.0 followed
by acidic precipitation at pH 4.8. The precipitate was resolubilised at pH 7.8. Subsequently, a crude glycinin fraction was obtained by acidic precipitation at pH 6.4 and the pelleted glycinin was resolubilised in 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer at pH 7.8 containing 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. For further purification ammoniumsulphate was added to the resolubilised crude glycinin fraction up to 50% saturation. After centrifugation (30 min at 12,000g ; 4 8 C) additional ammoniumsulphate was added to the supernatant
to a concentration of 70% saturation. The precipitate obtained after centrifugation (30 min at 12,000g ; 4 8 C) was resolubilised in a 10 mM potassium phosphatebuffer at pH 7.8 in the presence of 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 20% glycerol. This fraction, purified glycinin, was stored at 2 40 8 C. After defrosting part of the purified glycinin, it was extensively dialysed against Millipore water and freezedried afterwards (storage at2 20 8 C). The purity of glycinin, as determined by SDS-PAGE under reducing and nonreducing
conditions, was estimated to be . 95% by densitometric analysis of the gel. SDS-PAGE analysis was performed on a Phast System (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Gradient gels (10–15%) were used, which were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The gel was calibrated with low molecular weight markers ranging from 14–94 kDa (Pharmacia).
Preparation of glycinin dispersions and gels
 Prior to an experiment, glycinin (5–15% w/v) was suspended in pH 7.6 buffers at 20 8 C with ionic strengths of 0.5, 0.2 and 0.03. The I .  0: 5 buffer consists of 35 mM potassium phosphate and 0.4 M NaCl, the I .  0: 2 buffer of 35 mM potassiumphosphate and 0.1 M NaCl and the I .  0: 03 buffer of 10 mM potassium phosphate. For experiments performed at pH 7.6 the ionic strength was increased
by , 0.02 and for experiments performed at pH 3.8 by , 0.07 based on the amount of NaOH and HCl, respectively, needed to adjust the pH. We will refer in the article to the ionic strength of the buffers used since ionic strength is also increased slightly due to relatively high protein concentrations. Gel formation of glycinin suspensions (10% (w/v)) was induced consecutively by heating from 20 to 95 8 C at a rate of 1 K/min, keeping temperature constant at 95 8 C for 30 min and cooling down to 20 8 C at a rate of 1 K/min. For
the experiments to isolate network protein (Section 2.4) and for confocal scanning laser microscopy (CSLM) at I .  0: 03 and pH 3.8 gels were made with 15% (w/v) protein, because 10% gels were too weak to handle.
Isolation of non-network protein from glycinin gels
 Glycinin gels were centrifuged at 15,800g  for 30 min at 20 8 C. As estimated from the Stokes equation protein 366 C.M.M. Lakemond et al. / Food Hydrocolloids 17 (2003) 365–377 aggregates in the supernatant must be smaller than , 0.2 m m. The protein in the supernatant obtained was defined as non-network protein. The volume of the supernatant was determined as the sensitivity to expulsion
of water under pressure, a measure of water holding capacities of the gels. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the Dumas combustion method on a NA 2100 protein/nitrogen analyser (CE Instruments, Thermoquest Italia, Milano, Italy) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Atropine and aceetanilide were used for calibration.
Isolation of network protein from glycinin gels
 Slices of about 40 m m thickness were cut from glycinin gels in a microtome cryostat Biomed HM500 OM (Micron Laborgera¨te GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) and transferred to the appropriate buffer (250 times excess w/v). Sodium azide (0.01%) was added to prevent microbial growth. The soluble protein in the samples was allowed to diffuse out of the slices for 24 h, which is sufficiently long for reaching equilibrium based on the slice thickness. This was also illustrated by a diffusion experiment for 48 h yielding
similar results. Next, the slices were gathered by centrifugation (870g  for 15 min) and the precipitate was washed
twice with the appropriate buffer. The final residue was defined as ‘network protein’.
Composition of network and non-network protein
 The ratio of acidic to basic polypeptides in the nonnetwork and the network protein was studied by SDS-PAGE analysis under reducing conditions performed on a Phast System (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) followed by densitometric analysis (n .  4) of the gel. Gradient gels (10–15%) were used, which were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The gel was calibrated with low molecular weight markers ranging from 14–94 kDa (Pharmacia). The obtained values were corrected for the difference in intensity on the gels between the acidic and basic polypeptides based on data from native glycinin. This difference is caused by the different composition and the different molecular weights. From the protein content of the non-network protein and the polypeptide ratio, the amount
of the acidic and basic polypeptides present in the nonnetwork and the network fraction was calculated. For the calculation it was assumed that 10% of the total volume was not available for non-network protein due to part of the volume being occupied by network protein and the occurrence of steric exclusion effects. The magnitude of the steric exclusion effects is determined by the type of ‘non-network’ protein (van Boekel & Walstra, 1989 ), who studied steric exclusion effects of serum proteins with respect to (para) casein micelles.
Confocal scanning laser microscopy
 Confocal scanning laser microscopy (CSLM)  measurements of glycinin gels were performed on a Leica TCS SP
Confocal Scanning Light Microscope (Leica, Heidelberg, Germany), in single photon mode, configured with an inverted microscope (model Leica DM IRBE), and using an Ar/Kr laser. Slices of approximately 0.2–0.5 cm thick were cut of the cylindrical shaped gels and the protein was labeled with Fluorescein Isothiocyanate (FITC). Two drops of a 0.1% aqueous solution of FITC were added to each sample slice and incubated at ambient temperature for 30 min. During this incubation the dye will diffuse equally over the sample volume, as was followed by direct observation using the microscope. The excitation wavelength was 488 nm, and the emission maximum was at 518 nm. The following Leica objective lenses were used: 20 £  /0.7NA/dry/HC PL APO, 63 £  /UV/1.25NA/water
immersion/PL APO. In addition to 2D images, 3D image stacks were recorded and presented in 2D projections of the
sample volume. Optical imaging techniques introduce a distortion in the image, in particular in the third dimension due to the pointspread function which is a characteristic of the imaging instrument. Therefore, a selection of the data files from the
samples I .  0: 5 at pH 7.6 and pH 3.8 was processed by application of Huygens-2 software (Scientific Volume Imaging, Hilversum). The ‘estimate background’ tool was applied to a spherical area (radius 0.5 m m) to determine the average background pixel value, which was set as threshold value. Next, a deconvolution and subsequent apodisation of the data was performed to correct for the distortion.
Rheological measurement at small deformation
 Gel formation of 10–15% (w/v) glycinin suspensions was studied by dynamic measurements in a Bohlin CVO rheometer (Bohlin Instruments LTD, Cirencester, United Kingdom) using a smooth concentric cylinder geometry C14 unit (cell content 3 ml). To prevent evaporation of the solvent, a thin layer of soy oil was put on top of the samples. Measurements were performed at a constant strain of 0.01 and an angular frequency of 0.63 rad/s. To induce gel formation, samples were heated according to the same temperature profile as described in Section 2.2. Gelation temperature, is defined as the temperature at which the storage modulus, G0 , started to increase over 0.5 Pa/min. In this work we define that a gel has been formed when G0  is
larger than 1 Pa. All experiments were performed (at least) in duplicate.
Circular dichroism spectroscopy
 Non-network protein was analyzed by far- and near-UV CD. Spectra were recorded at 20 8 C using a Jasco J-715 spectropolarimeter (Jasco corporation, Japan). For near-UV  CD measurements quartz cells with a pathlength of 10 mm were used, while for far-UV CD measurements quartz cells with a pathlength of 0.2 mm were used. The scan interval for near-UV CD was 350–250 nm, for far-UV CD measurements 260–190 nm. Spectra were recorded as averages of 25 spectra using a scan speed of 100 nm/min, a bandwidth of 1 nm, a response time of 64 ms, and a step resolution of 0.5 nm. The far-UV CD spectra at I .  0: 5 and I .  0: 2 could not be recorded below 194 and 197 nm, respectively, due to strong absorption of the chloride ions in these buffers.
Gel permeation chromatography
The aggregation state of non-network protein was analyzed at 20 8 C by gel permeation chromatography using a Superdex 200 column 10/30 (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) attached to an FPLC system (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden). The elution buffer was equal to the sample buffer. The flow rate was 1 ml/min and the eluate was monitored at 280 nm. The column was calibrated with a high molecular weight gel filtration calibration kit (Pharmacia).
 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
 DSC thermograms were recorded using a micro DSC III (Setaram, Caluire, France) with 0.9 ml vessels. Glycinin suspensions (10% w/v) at different pH values and ionic strengths were heated from 20 to 115 8 C at a rate of 1 K/min and subsequently cooled to 20 8 C at the same rate. The denaturation temperature Td  was defined as the temperature at maximum heatflow of the endothermic transition. The onset denaturation temperature (To ) was defined as the temperature at the crosspoint of the tangent of the endotherm and the baseline.
Infrared spectroscopy
Lyophilized glycinin was suspended in potassium phosphate buffers as described in Section 2.2 prepared in D2 O instead of H2 O at different pD values and ionic strengths. To obtain H-D exchange of labile protons in the protein, the suspensions (10% (w/v)) were stirred for about 16 h at 20 8 C in the buffer at different ionic strengths at pD 7.6 and adjusted to the appropriate pD afterwards. Infrared (IR) spectra were recorded using a Perkin–Elmer 1725 Fourier transform IR spectrometer equipped with a liquid nitrogen-cooled mercury/cadmium/telluride detector with a temperature controlled cell interfaced to a computer. The spectral resolution of aqcuisition was 4 cm21 , but was enhanced to 1 cm21  by zero-filling prior to Fourier Transformation. To prevent evaporation during heating, the protein sample was placed between two CaF2  windows inside a ring of stretched parafilm (, 0.1 mm). The temperature
profile used was identical to the one described in Section  2.2. To study the reversibility of the conformational changes a second scan from 20 to 95 8 C was recorded after cooling. In this work we use pD .  pH 2  0: 1 in accordance to Bundi &Wu¨trich (1979) , who suggest that in protein studies pD .  pH 2  0: 1 should be used, instead of the generally used pD .  pH .  0: 4;  because of the isotope effect on the acidity constants of the ionizable groups of proteins. During the experiment we noticed that the protein in D2 O buffers
tends to form a layer with high viscosity on the bottom of the solution when stirring was stopped. This was not observed in H2 O buffers. Spectral analysis and display were carried out using Infrared Data Manager Analytical Software (Perkin–Elmer, Beaconsfield, UK). Second derivative spectra were calculated over the region between 1800 and 1500 cm21 . Changes in protein secondary structure were monitored from discrete shifts in position of these bands with temperature. The temperature at which changes in secondary structure start to take place (Tir ) is defined as the crosspoint of the tangent of the baseline observed with increasing temperature and the transition.