 Materials and methods
Extraction and purification of 7S globulin (Ara h 1)
from peanuts
Fresh peanuts (Arachis hypogea) from Argentina were
obtained from the company De Graaf, Pelplin, Poland. Peanuts were ground and defatted with n-hexane (2 timesfor 15 min). Ara h 1 was extracted and purified fromdefatted peanut flour as described previously by Marshet al. [37] with the following modifications: after theextraction procedure, solid ammonium sulphate was addedto the extract to a final concentration of 70 % saturation,and precipitation was carried out during 1 h in an ice bath.The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at40,0009g for 40 min at 4 C. The precipitation procedurewas repeated to a final concentration of 90 % saturation ofammonium sulphate. After centrifugation (40,0009g,40 min, 4 C) the pellet was collected, dissolved in buffer(1:60 v/v, 20 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 3 mMNaN3, pH7.5) and dialysed overnight against the same buffer at 4 Cusing 10 kDa MWCO dialysis tubing. Further purificationwas performed by concanavalin A affinity chromatography(Sigma Aldrich, Germany) according to manufacturer’sinstructions, and elution was carried out with 50 mM a-Dmethylmannoside(Sigma Aldrich, Germany). Peanut 7Sglobulin (Ara h 1) containing peak fractions were pooledand subjected to gel permeation chromatography using aSuperdex Preparative Grade S200 column (GE Healthcare,Buckinghamshire, UK). Pooled fractions were concentratedand dialyzed against PBS by ultrafiltration using anAmicon-stirred cell equipped with a regenerated cellulosemembrane with a 10 kDa MWCO membrane (Millipore).The protein concentration was assessed by the BCA-assay(Pierce, USA), and purity was determined by SDS-PAGEas described below.Protein glycationThe protein solution was split into seven batches of 10 mgeach and contained 0.01 % sodium azide. To three batches,glucose (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) was added in a ratio of1:2 (w/w protein:glucose) [15, 17]. All seven samples wereplaced into glass bottles, frozen at -70 C and lyophilized(Christ, Alpha 1-4 LSC). Next, the lyophilized proteinsamples (one with glucose and one without) were heatedfor 7 days at 37 C or for 3 days at 60 C in a laboratoryincubator (Wamed, C-30G), or for 20 min at 145 C in aforced convection chamber for thermal research (Wamed,KBC 65 W). One batch was not treated and regarded as thenative, non-modified form. After treatment, the sampleswere allowed to gradually cool to room temperature. Proteinswere slowly dissolved in Milli-Q water, centrifuged(50009g, 15 min, 4 C) and the supernatant was collectedand ultrafiltrated (Millipore, Amicon Ultra-15, 10,000NMWL) against PBS for several rounds to remove theresidual glucose and other small molecular weight products.Protein concentration and changes in solubility wereassessed by the BCA-assay (Pierce, USA). The change ofcolour was assessed visually and by the measurement ofabsorbance at k = 420 nm. An aliquots were stored at-70 C. All treatments were performed in duplicate.Assessment of biochemical changesSDS-PAGE analysisNative (non-modified) and modified Ara h 1 were separatedby SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions. Protein samplesin SDS-sample buffer were boiled and loaded (10 lg/lane)on a 12 % polyacrylamide gel and afterwards stained usingcolloidal Coomassie (Sigma Aldrich, Germany). Amolecular weight marker ranging from 6.5 to 200 kDa(Sigma Aldrich, Germany) was included, and molecularmasses were calculated by the use of GelScan 1.10software.O-Phthaldialdehyde (OPA) assayThe OPA assay was performed as described before [15,16]. Protein samples (250 lg/ml) were mixed with theOPA reagent [38] in a ratio of 1:10 (v/v). The mixedsolutions were incubated for 20 min at RT, and theabsorbance was measured at 340 nm against a controlcontaining PBS and the OPA reagent. Unreacted aminogroups were estimated from a calibration curve establishedwith L-leucine.Anthrone-sulphuric acid colorimetric microassayThe anthrone-sulphuric acid colorimetric microassay wasperformed as described previously [15, 16]. The proteinsolutions (250 lg/ml) were mixed in 96-well plates (SigmaAldrich, Germany) with the cooled anthrone reagent in aratio of 1:10 (v/v) [39]. A glucose standard curve was usedto calculate the sugar content.Nitrobluetetrazolium (NBT) assayThe reagent was prepared as described before by Iwanet al. [15]. The reagent and sample were mixed in the ratio19:1 and incubated at 37 C. Fructosamine (320 lM/L)was used as a standard and absorbance was measured in amicroplate reader (Asys UVM 340) at 550 nm after 9 and10 min of incubation. The results were calculated using thefollowing formula: fructosamine concentration [lmol] =[(DA sample - DA blind sample)/(DA calibrator - DAblind sample)] 9 calibrator concentration.Determination of fluorescenceOne millilitre of each sample at a concentration of 1 mg/mlwere taken and diluted, to prevent quenching effects, with an appropriate volume of PBS. The solution was measuredat an excitation wavelength of 374 nm and emissionwavelength of 451 nm which were previously estimatedas characteristic for Ara h 1 samples. The fluorescencewas determined with the use of a fluorescence spectrophotometer(PerkinElmer LS 50B, GB) and quartz glasscuvette with light path of 1 cm. The device was handledwith the software package PerkinElmer FL Data Manager(FLDM). The fluorescence intensity of protein-boundcompounds and free fluorescent compounds in the fluidobtained after ultrafiltration of treated Ara h 1 (10 kDacut-off membrane, see section Protein Glycation) wasestimated.Assessment of biological changesProtein hydrolysisFor pepsin hydrolysis, the protein solution was adjusted topH 2.2 using 1 M HCl. Pepsin (3,200–4,500 units/mgprotein, Sigma Aldrich, Germany) was dissolved in simulatedgastric fluid (0.15 M NaCl, adjusted to pH 2.0 withHCl) and added to the protein solution in a final enzymesubstrateratio of 1:10 (w/w). The hydrolysis was performedfor 1 h at 37 C with agitation. The enzyme wasinactivated by increasing the pH of the samples to 7–8 with1 M NaOH, and subsequently, samples were directlycooled in an ice bath. The degree of hydrolysis wasdetermined by measuring the increase in the number of freea-amino groups after the hydrolysis using the OPA methodas described before [38].Caco-2 cell cultureThe human colon cancer cell line, Caco-2, obtained fromthe American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD)were between passages 40 and 50. For all experiments,cells were cultured in DMEM (Sigma Aldrich, Germany),supplemented with 20 % FCS (Invitrogen, France), 1 %NEAA (Sigma Aldrich) and 1 % of gentamycin (Invitrogen,France) at 37 C in a humidified atmosphere of 5 %CO2 in air. The culture medium was changed every2–3 days. For both proliferation and IL-8 secretion tests,cells were plated at a density of 2.5 9 105 cells/ml in96-well plates (Becton–Dickinson) and grown for 7 days.Proliferation testTo measure DNA synthesis, Caco-2 cells were incubated inthe presence of BrdU (50-Bromo-2-deoxyuridine) reagentand non-hydrolysed and hydrolysed Ara h 1, respectively,at concentration of 500 lg/ml during 1.5 h. After labelling,BrdU incorporation into cellular DNA was measured by acolorimetric immunoassay using a commercially availablecell proliferation ELISA kit (enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay), according to the manufacturer’s instructions(Roche, France). The percentage of proliferation was calculatedas:ðAbssample  AbsblankÞ=ðAbsst  AbsblankÞ  100%where Abssample is absorbance of Caco-2 cells incubated inthe presence of Ara h 1 and BrdU, Absblank is absorbance ofCaco-2 cells incubated in pure medium (without Ara h 1and BrdU) and Absst is absorbance of Caco-2 cells incubatedin the presence of BrdU.Determination of IL-8 secretionPost-confluent, Caco-2 cells were washed two times withPBS pre-warmed to 37 C. To measure IL-8 secretion,cells were incubated in the presence of non-hydrolysed andhydrolysed Ara h 1 at a concentration of 25 lg/ml during24 h. Incubation time and protein concentration wereestimated and optimized in previous studies. Each experimentalcondition was analysed in quadruplicate. The contentof IL-8 in media was measured using a commerciallyavailable ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay)according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BD Biosciences,OptEIA, Pharmingen, San Diego, CA).StatisticsTwo independent experiments for two different batches oftreated Ara h 1 were performed in triplicate. Data wereexpressed as mean ± SD. For each batch, an individualassays were performed in triplicates for the biochemicalanalysis and in duplicate for Caco-2 studies. All measurementswere done in triplicate for biochemical tests orin quadruplicate in the case of in vitro studies. Statisticalanalysis was carried out by GraphPad Prism 4 software. Aone-way ANOVA test with Tukey post hoc (p\0.05) wasused to evaluate the significance.