Materials and methods
Materials
Bovine milk b-Lg was purified to homogeneity using a
nondenaturing protocol as described previously [13].
Succinic anhydride and N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-
N0-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) were purchased
from Fluka. Ortho-phtaldialdehyde (OPA),
methylamine, and Hepes buffer were obtained from
Sigma. N,N0-dimethyl-2-mercaptoethylammonium chloride
(DMA) and disodiumtetraboratdecahydrat (Borax)
were purchased from Merck. 2-Ethyl-5-phenylisoxazolium-
30-sulfonate (Woodward reagent K) was obtained
from Aldrich. Sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) was from
Serva. The standard 1M CaCl2 solution was purchased
from Fluka and the exact calcium concentration was
verified by atomic absorption spectrometry.
Calcium-binding measurements
Calcium-binding data were obtained by titration of a
standard CaCl2 solution into a b-Lg solution of defined
concentration, while the calcium concentration in solution
was monitored using a calcium-specific electrode
(Ankersmit, The Netherlands). To minimize effects of
different ionic strength KCl was added (final concentration
of 150 mM). The millivolt response of the electrode
was measured at constant ionic strength and
constant temperature (20  1C) and used to calculate
the free [Ca2ﬂ] in the incubation mixture. A calibration
curve was obtained by preparing CaCl2 solutions in
10mM Hepes buffer (pH 7.2) ranging from 0 to 80mM.
The final calcium concentrations were checked using
atomic absorption spectroscopic analysis, demonstrating
that the error of the approach used was less than
1%. For the titration of CaCl2 to b-Lg, 10 ml of a 20 mg/
ml b-Lg (1.1mM) solution in 10mM Hepes (pH 7.2)
was titrated with a 1 M standard CaCl2 solution. The
free [Ca2ﬂ] (F) at each point of the titration was determined
from the calibration curve, and the calcium
bound to b-Lg (Cab) was calculated by subtracting the
free [Ca2ﬂ] from the total [Ca2ﬂ] at equilibrium. Scatchard
plots were obtained by plotting the ratio of bound
calcium per protein (mol/mol) (B) over the free calcium
concentration (B/F, mM1) against B. From the slope of
the plot the calcium dissociation constants (Kd) is obtained,
while the x-axis intercepts gives the numbers of
calcium-binding sites ›nﬁ.
Chemical modification of b-Lg
Conversion of amino groups into carboxylic acid
groups. Amino groups in b-Lg were succinylated essentially
as described by Klotz [23]. To this end, two 400-ml
solutions of 25 mg/ml b-Lg in deionized water were set
at pH 8.0 by the addition of 3M NaOH using a pH-stat
titration equipment (room temperature). Next, 0.4 and
1 g of solid succinic anhydride were added in small
portions yielding final concentrations of 9.9 and
24.75mM succinic anhydride. During the addition of
succinic anhydride, the pH was kept at 8.0 ›0:2ﬁ by the
addition of 1M NaOH. After addition, the solutions
were stirred for another 24 h, followed by extensive dialysis
(four times an 20-fold excess of volume) against
deionized water at 4 C and subsequent freeze-drying
and stored at )20 C.
Elimination of carboxylic acid groups. Carboxylic acid
groups in b-Lg were eliminated by using a modification
of the procedure described by Hoare and Koshland [24].
To this end, two 500-ml solutions of 10 mg/ml b-Lg
containing 1M methylamine were set to pH 4.6 and
144 J.-W.F.A. Simons et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 406 (2002) 143–152
stirred at room temperature. Subsequently, solid EDC
(0.12 and 0.48 g) was added stepwise to give final concentrations
of 1.25 and 5mM, while the pH was kept at
4.6 by the addition of 1M NaOH using a pH-stat
equipment. When all added EDC was dissolved, the
solutions were stirred for another 2 h. Next, the pH was
raised to 8.0 by the addition of NaOH (1 M). After
another 24 h of stirring at room temperature, the mixtures
were dialyzed extensively against deionized water
(4 C) followed by freeze-drying of the material. All
modification reactions took place at room temperature
in the presence of 150 lg/ml sodium azide to prevent
microbial growth.
Analytical methods for product characterization
SDS–PAGE. The purity of b-Lg, before and after
modification, was checked using sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) according
to Laemmli [25]. Homogeneous 15% Tris–HCl
Ready Gels (Bio-rad) were run on a Mini-Protean II
Electrophoresis system (Bio-rad). Samples were dissolved
in sample buffer, containing 62.5mM Tris–HCl
(pH 6.8), 1.25% SDS, 5% glycerol, 0.00125% bromophenol
blue, and 1.25% b-mercaptoethanol, and were
heated for 10 min at 100 C before analysis. Gels were
stained in 0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 in 40%
methanol and 10% acetic acid solution and destained in
30% methanol and 10% acetic acid solution. A calibration
kit with low-molecular-weight markers ranging
from 14 to 94 kDa from Pharmacia was used. Comparison
of SDS–PAGE gels run under reducing and
nonreducing conditions demonstrated that the materials
used in this study appeared monomeric in SDS and
contained no significant covalent dimers or other
aggregated material (results not shown).
Isoelectric focusing. The apparent isoelectric points
(IEPs) of nonmodified and modified b-Lg species were
determined using the Phast System (Pharmacia). Ready
to use PhastGel IEF 3-9 gels were used, which were
stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 and destained
in 30% methanol and 10% acetic acid solution. A
calibration kit (Parmacia) with proteins having IEPs
ranging from 3.5 to 9.0 was used.
Chromogenic OPA assay. The available number of
primary amino groups on the protein was determined by
the method described by Schmidt and Robben [26]. This
method is based on the specific reaction between orthophtaldialdehyde
and free primary amino groups in
proteins in the presence of DMA, to give alkyl-isoindole
derivatives that show absorbency at 340 nm. The
OPA reagent was prepared by dissolving 40 mg OPA in
1ml methanol, followed by the addition of 25 ml 0.1M
Borax buffer, 200 mg DMA, and 5 ml 10% SDS. Finally,
the volume was adjusted to 50 ml with demineralized
water. A quartz cuvette was filled with 3ml of this
reagent and the absorbency at 340nm was determined.
Subsequently, 15 ll of a b-Lg solution was added and
after an incubation time of 30 min at room temperature,
the absorbency at 340nm was determined again. A
calibration curve was obtained by adding 10, 20, 30, 40,
80, 100, and 150 ll of a 2mML-leucine solution in water
to 3ml of OPA reagent, yielding concentrations in the
range from 6.6 to 95 lM L-leucine. All measurements
were performed in triplicate.
Chromogenic Woodward reagent K assay. The available
number of carboxylic acid groups on the protein
was determined by a modified method as originally described
by Sinha and Brewer [27]. This method is based
on the reaction between Woodward reagent K (2-ethyl-
5-phenylisoxazolium-30-sulfonate; WRK) and free carboxylic
acid groups in proteins. As shown by several
research groups [28,29] this reaction results in an increase
in absorbency at 269 nm. Typically, proteins were
dissolved at a concentration of approximately 1mM
carboxylate groups in 4.5 ml 50mM Mes buffer of pH
5.0 containing 1% SDS. After addition of 0.5 ml of
WRK (200mM in 0.01N HCl), the mixture was incubated
for 20 min at room temperature using a pH-stat to
maintain the pH at 5.0 with 0.2M NaOH. The reacted
protein was isolated from unbound WRK using a PD-10
gel-filtration column that was equilibrated with 50mM
Mes at a pH of 5.0. Subsequently the absorbency at
269nm was determined. From a linear calibration curve
using different concentrations of b-Lg, a molar extinction
coefficient for the WRK-protein complex of 3400
(200)M1 cm1 was calculated. This molar extinction
coefficient was used to determine the number of available
carboxylate groups on modified proteins. All
measurements were performed at least in duplicate.
Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of
flight (MALDI-TOF) analysis. To determine the masses
of the native and modified b-Lg’s, mass spectrometric
analyses were performed on a PerSeptive Biosystems
(Foster City, CA) Voyager-DE RP equipped with a
nitrogen laser of 337nm with 3-ns pulsewidth. The mass
spectrometer was operating in the positive-ion mode
with a delayed extraction time of 200 ns. The ions entering
the TOF compartment had an energy of 12 kV.
Protein samples were prepared by using C18 reversephase
Ziptips (Millipore), essentially as described by the
manufacturer.  The elution step was performed in 10 l l
of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. A
saturated solution of sinapinic acid, 10 mg in 500 l l
acetonitrile, 400 l l deionized water, and 100 l l 3%
trifluoroacetic acid, was used as matrix solution.
Typically, 9 l l of matrix solution was mixed with 1 l l
of protein sample. Of this solution, 1 l l was spotted
onto a golden welled plate and air-dried. Spectra were
accumulated in the 2–40-kDa region and samples of
cytochrome c  were included as control in each run
of analyses.  Determination of protein structure
Far-UV circular dichroism (CD) spectra of 0.1 mg/ml
of nonmodified and modified b-Lg in 2.5mM Hepes
buffer (pH 7.2) were recorded on a Jasco J-715 spectropolarimeter
at 20 C in the range from 190 to 260nm
with a spectral resolution of 0.2 nm. The scan speed was
100 nm/min and the response time was 0.125 s with a
spectral bandwidth of 1 nm. Quartz cells with an optical
path of 0.1 cm were used. The spectra were corrected for
the corresponding protein-free sample. Far-UV CD
spectra were analyzed for the secondary structure
content of the proteins using a standard nonlinear leastsquares
fitting procedure making use of reference
spectra.
 Determination of protein stability
Circular dichroism spectroscopy. Near-UV CD spectra
of 1 mg/ml solutions of nonmodified and modified
b-Lg in 2.5mM Hepes buffer (pH 7.2) were recorded on
a Jasco J-715 spectropolarimeter from 260 to 350 nm at
a temperature of 20 C. Solutions contained urea in
the concentration range from 0 to 7M. The spectral
resolution was 0.2 nm, the scan speed was 100 nm/min,
and the response time was 0.125 s with a bandwidth of
1 nm. Quartz cells with an optical path of 0.1 cm were
used. All spectra were corrected for the corresponding
protein-free sample.
 Differential scanning calorimetry. Differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) was performed on a Micro-DSC
III (Perkin–Elmer). Typically, 50 mg/ml of non-modified
and modified b-Lg in 10mM Hepes buffer at pH 7.2
was heated from 20 to 95 C with a heating rate of
1 K/min. The denaturation temperature ( TD) and the
onset temperature of denaturation ( Ton) were determined
using standard software provided by the supplier.
 Calcium-induced aggregation experiments
Solutions of 1ml 20 mg/ml b-Lg (2% w/w) in
10mM Hepes buffer, pH 7.2, were placed into a
thermostated spectrophotometer U-3000 (Shimadzu),
equipped with a Peltier sample-holder. The temperature
control was within 0.3 C. After 3 min of incubation,
different volumes of a 1M CaCl2 solution
were added to give end concentrations varying
between 1 and 100mM CaCl2. The turbidity was followed
as a function of time by measuring the absorbency
at 500 nm at regular time intervals. The cuvettes
pathlength was 0.5 cm. Experiments were also done at
pH 5.5 and at pH 8.5, in 10mM sodium acetate and
10mM Tris–HCl buffer, respectively. The experimental
errors in these aggregation experiments as monitored
by the half-time of kinetics were in the order of 10
and 15%.
Results
 Calcium-induced aggregation
Heating a 20 mg/ml solution of b-Lg in 10mM Hepes
(pH 7.2) at a temperature of 70 C for 2 h does not result
in changes in the turbidity of this solution, as monitored
by the optical density at 500 nm (Fig. 1). In the presence
of calcium, however, a clear increase in the absorbency
takes place in time, indicative of the formation of protein
aggregates. This calcium-triggered aggregation of b-
Lg at 70 C depends on the concentration of calcium
added. A maximum optical density level is reached after
addition of approximately 15mM calcium, while the
maximal turbidity decreases again at higher calcium
concentrations. The protein solutions with 10 and
15mM of CaCl2 added have turned into a firm gel after
30 min of heating, while all other incubations appeared
viscous. To illustrate the specific effect of calcium compared
to the monovalent sodium ion, NaCl was added
instead of CaCl2 in a concentration that gives a comparable
ionic strength to the solution. Addition of
50mM NaCl yields clear solutions after 30 min of
heating, and only at a concentration as high as 500mM,
the b-Lg solution became slightly turbid (data not
shown). From the latter experiment it is concluded that
the ion-induced effect cannot be a simple charge
screening effect.
 Calcium-binding
It has been suggested that the molecular role of calcium
in the aggregation of b-Lg involves the formation
of site-specific intermolecular salt bridges between negatively
charged groups on two (partially) unfolded
protein molecules [11]. To determine the b-Lg calciumbinding
properties a calcium-selective electrode was
used. The calcium-binding curve (Fig. 2A; closed circles)  shows that with increasing calcium concentration the
number of calcium ions bound to b -Lg increases.
Clearly, the binding-curve does not show a saturation
level for the binding in this calcium concentration range.
b -Lg contains in total 27 carboxylates and in principle
each of these groups could act as binding site for calcium.
The relatively slow increase of moles calcium
bound per protein at higher concentration indicates that
the affinity is, however, very low. When the binding data
of Fig. 2A at low calcium concentrations are converted
into a Scatchard plot, some care must be taken since a
quantitative interpretation could be hindered by the very
low affinity binding at high calcium concentrations, as
reported previously (see, e.g., [30]). It can be seen that at
20  C b -Lg binds about 3 molecules of calcium (intercept
of x -axis) with an affinity constant of 3.4mM (1/slope).
These values are summarized in Table 1.
Increasing the number of negative surface charges
 To study the role of the calcium-binding properties of
b -Lg for calcium-induced aggregation, we decided to
modify these binding properties by chemical modification
of the protein. The number of negative charges on
the surface of the protein was increased by chemical
reaction of the primary amines (lysines and N -terminus)
with succinic anhydride, resulting in the introduction of
carboxylates at the expense of positive charges (at pH
7.2). The degree of succinylation can be controlled by
the molar ratio of succinic anhydride over b -Lg added
(not shown). For this study, two batches were prepared
with a 7- and 18-fold molar excess of reagent over
protein. The degree of succinylation in the product was
determined by measuring the number of primary amines
before and after modification using a chromogenic assay
based on the reaction of primary amines with orthophtaldialdehyde.
With this method, 17 ( 1) primary
amines were detected in nonmodified b -Lg (theoretical
number is 16). For the succinylated preparations 13 and
10 ( 0: 7) primary amines were determined, indicating
average degrees of succinylation of 19 and 38%, respectively
(Table 1). The heterogeneity of the modified
preparation was studied using mass spectrometry. In
Fig. 3 the MALDI-TOF mass spectra of nonmodified
and 19 and 38% succinylated b -Lg are shown. The
spectrum of the nonmodified b -Lg consists of two major
peaks with masses of 18,365 and 18,278 Da, close to the
calculated theoretical mass of the A and B genotypes,
respectively. Upon succinylation Gaussian mass distributions
are obtained, illustrating that the preparations
are heterogeneous with average degrees of modification
of 3 and 6 succinate groups per protein. The average
mass increase is 303 and 606 Da, respectively, but for
both preparations species with  1,  2 and ﬂ 1 or ﬂ 2
succinate groups can be recognized in the spectra (theoretic
mass increase per succinate group is 101 Da).
These results are in full agreement with the average
number of modified amino groups as determined by
OPA analysis.
Decreasing the number of negative surface charges
 To decrease the number of negative charges of b -Lg
the protein was subjected to a two-step modification
procedure to neutralize the negatively charged carboxylates
on the protein. The carboxylates were first activated
by reaction with an excess of water-soluble
c carbodiimide (EDC). Next, the activated groups were
allowed to react with the nucleophile methylamine, resulting
in methylation of the carboxylates. Based on
initial experiments, the conditions were chosen such that
two batches of modified b -Lg were obtained. To quantify
the degree of methylation, the number of free
carboxylates was determined before and after modification
using a chromogenic assay (Woodward reagent
K). With this method 28 ( 3) carboxylic acid groups
were detected in nonmodified b -Lg (27 carboxylates are
present in the protein). For the two methylated preparations,
25 ( 1) and 23 ( 1) carboxylates were  determined, indicating degrees of methylation of about 7
and 15%, respectively (Table 1). Despite serious efforts it
was not possible to record MS spectra of these methylated
variants to check the heterogeneity, most probably
due to the poor ionization properties of the methylated
proteins.
Apparent surface charge
 Changing the number of potential calcium-binding
sites by protein modification might also affect the isoelectric
point of these materials. The IEP of (modified)
b -Lg was determined using isoelectric focussing (not
shown) and the apparent values are listed in Table 1.
Compared to the nonmodified b -Lg (IEP of 5.2), the
IEPs of the succinylated b -Lgs are slightly lower, while
the methylated proteins have somewhat higher IEPs.
For all modified materials ranges of isoelectric points
are observed of approximately 0.3–0.4 units, except for
the 15% methylated material that displayed a range of
0.7 units. Capillary zone electrophoresis confirmed the
trend in IEP for the various materials (results not
shown).
Protein structure and stability
 Since b -Lg aggregation requires thermo destabilization
of the protein, differences in the structural integrity
by protein modification might interfere with the interpretation
of the results. For this reason the structure and
stability of the modified b -Lgs were compared to those
of the nonmodified protein. To obtain secondary
structure information of the (modified) b -Lgs we used
far-UV circular dichroism spectroscopy. From the CD
spectra the contributions of a -helix, b -structures
(b -strand and b -turn), and random coil were estimated
and are summarized in Table 2. These results show that
the low degree of modification as applied in this work
does not give rise to significant changes in secondary
structure. In addition, near-UV CD and tryptophan
fluorescence spectra of native and the modified proteins
were very similar (results not shown), showing that also
at a tertiary folding level no significantly conformational
changes can be observed. Since under physiological
conditions b -Lg exists as a dimer, we checked whether
this was also the case after chemical modification. This
was checked using gel-permeation chromatography on a
Superdex-75 column ran in 10mM Hepes buffer (pH
7.2), containing 50mM NaCl to prevent nonspecific
interactions with the column material. Under these
conditions all b -Lg variants proteins eluted as single
symmetric peaks representing the dimer form of the  protein with an apparent mass of 36 kDa based on
elution profiles of calibration proteins (results not
shown).
To determine the protein stability we used urea
unfolding experiments and differential scanning calorimetry
(DSC). In Fig. 4A near-UV CD spectra of nonmodified
b -Lg are shown in the absence and presence of
different urea concentrations. Without urea at least two
distinct negative extremes at 285 and at 293nm can be
recognized. Upon addition of urea both signals decrease
in intensity and are not visible anymore at a concentration  of 6M, indicating that the protein has completely
unfolded. The ellipticity at 293nm is plotted in Fig. 4B as
a function of the urea concentration. From this plot a
midpoint of urea-induced unfolding of 3.8M can be
observed for the nonmodified protein. From identical
experiments with 38% succinylated and 15% methylated
b -Lgs (Fig. 4B; closed and open squares, respectively)
midpoints for unfolding of respectively 3.2 and 4.2M
urea were determined, while the intermediate degrees of
modification show also intermediate values. The free
energies of unfolding (DGu ) at 20 C determined from
these curves, assuming a two-state unfolding according
to Pace [31], are presented in Table 2. These results illustrate
that the stability of all these proteins is comparable
with a free energy for unfolding around 20 kJ/mol
(with an estimated error of 2–3 kJ/mol). In addition to
urea-unfolding studies differential scanning calorimetry
was used to characterize the heat stability of the (modified)
proteins. The thermograms (not shown) all had
comparable shapes representing a major endothermic
transition and an additional smaller contribution at
lower temperatures as reported frequently for
b -Lg in the literature. From the thermograms the midpoint
of heat denaturation (TD ) for the nonmodified
b -Lg was 76  C, while for the 38% succinylated and 15%
methylated proteins the Td  were respectively 86 and
78  C (Table 2). The enthalpy change associated with
denaturation decreased for both the succinylated and the
methylated variants by approximately 15%. The less
modified materials exhibited denaturation properties
intermediate to these high modified variants and the
nonmodified protein. In conclusion, these results show
that all modified proteins resemble the nonmodified b -Lg
with respect to the protein structure (on the secondary,
tertiary, and quaternary level) and have comparable
conformational stabilities, but slightly different denaturation
temperatures.
Calcium-binding of modified b-lactoglobulins
 To determine the calcium-binding properties of the
different b -Lg variants, calcium-binding curves were
measured in a similar way as described for the nonmodified
protein. The results are presented in Fig. 2A.
Clearly, the calcium-binding has increased for the  succinylated species as compared to the nonmodified
protein, with 12 and 16 mol of calcium ions bound per
mol of protein for the 19 and 38% succinylated b -Lgs,
respectively, at a CaCl2  concentration of 50mM. In
contrast, the methylated proteins bind less calcium ions
(up to 3–4) under the conditions used here. From
Scatchard plots based on the results shown in Fig. 2A
for the low calcium concentration range, dissociation
constants (KD ) and the number of binding sites ›nﬁ  were
determined and are summarized in Table 1. Typical
examples of these Scatchard plots are shown in Fig. 2B
for the 19% succinylated and 7% methylated protein. It
can be concluded from these data that both the binding
affinity and the number of binding sites improved upon
increasing the number of carboxylates per protein, while
those for the methylated b -Lgs have been impaired.
Calcium-induced aggregation of modified b-lactoglobulins
 To study a possible relation between calcium-binding
and calcium-induced aggregation, we compared the
calcium-induced aggregation kinetics of the modified b -
Lgs with those of the nonmodified protein using turbidity
measurements. To allow a proper comparison, the
aggregation kinetics was studied for each species 6K
below the denaturation temperature listed in Table 2
(i.e., 70  C for nonmodified b -Lg, 76 and 80  C for 19
and 38% succinylated proteins, respectively, and 72  C
for both methylated proteins). Fig. 5 shows the turbidity
measurements in the presence of 10mM calcium. Both
succinylated b -Lgs, which not only show an increase in
the number of calcium ions bound per protein molecule
but also in the affinity of binding (Table 1), do not aggregate
at this time scale and under these conditions.
Surprisingly, however, the aggregation kinetics of the
7% methylated b -Lg improved compared to the nonmodified
b -Lg, despite its lower calcium-binding affinity
and number of calcium-binding sites. Like nonmodified
b -Lg, this protein does not aggregate in the absence of
calcium under the conditions used here (not shown). The
same holds for the 15% methylated protein, for which
we have demonstrated that this protein calcium-binding
affinity was strongly reduced (Table 1).
pH dependence
 Since the IEP of the methylated proteins is more close
to pH 7.2 compared to nonmodified and succinylated
protein (Table 1), we investigated whether there is a
relation between the IEP of the protein and the pH of
the solution in which calcium-induced aggregation.
However, similar to the results found at pH 7.2, also at
pH 5.5 and at pH 8.5, the 7 and 15% methylated b -Lgs
did aggregate faster than the nonmodified protein upon
addition of 10mM CaCl2 , while the succinylated species
did not show any sign of turbidity under these conditions
(results not shown).
Effective net charge
 The observation that calcium does not trigger aggregation
of b -Lg after succinylation might be due to the
increase in negative surface charge, hindering the thermo-
denatured proteins to aggregate due to repulsive
interactions. To compensate for this additional electrostatic
repulsion, sodium chloride (150mM) was added to
the 38% succinylated protein prior to addition of calcium
chloride, to screen surface charges and make the
electric double-layer thickness comparable to that of
nonmodified b -Lg. The amount of additional salt added
even exceeds the amount required (64mM) to assume
a comparable Debeye length despite the differences
in surface charge density. However, also under these
conditions no aggregation of succinylated proteins
was observed (not shown).
Calcium concentration dependence
 Both for the succinylated and the methylated b -Lg
variants the aggregation was investigated in the presence
of different concentrations of calcium, in a similar way
as described for the nonmodified protein (see Fig. 1).
Typical examples are shown in Fig. 6. Although the
turbidity of the 38% succinylated b -Lg does not increase
in the presence of 10mM CaCl2 , Fig. 6A shows that
aggregation does occur, but only at higher concentrations
of calcium ions (> 30 mM). In contrast, the 7%
methylated b -Lg that in the presence of 10mM calcium
aggregates faster than the nonmodified b -Lg shows already
an increased turbidity in the presence of 3mM  CaCl2  (Fig. 6B). Similar dependencies are found for the
19% succinylated and 15% methylated proteins (not
shown). In Table 1 (last column) the calcium ion concentrations
are summarized for all b -Lg variants studied
here that yield the fastest aggregation kinetics under
these conditions. Although the kinetics of aggregation is
temperature dependent for a particular variant of b -Lg,
the sensitivity for the calcium concentration is not significantly
affected as demonstrated by studying the effect
at different temperatures in the range from 70 to 86  C
for various b -Lg variants (results not shown).

