II. EXPERIMENT
Seeds originating from one seed lot of ‘‘Green Coronet’’
cabbage ~Brassica oleracea L. Group. Capitata! were kindly
provided by American Takii Inc., Salinas, CA. Different seed
quality levels were prepared using seeds from the same seed
lot by aging them in the laboratory in two independent steps.
Seeds were first equilibrated to 70% relative humidity, heatsealed
in aluminum-foil plastic-laminate packets and then
aged at 40 °C for 0, 14, and 28 days.2 Following each ageing
period, the quality of seed was assessed as based on the
outcome of the standard germination test conducted at 25 °C.
Seeds were kept in a refrigerator ~about 5 °C! in sealed Ziplock
baggies. Prior to opening the baggies were allowed to
warm up for about an hour to avoid possible condensation.
To obtain large concentrations of volatiles within a relatively
short time, aged seeds ~initial moisture content 6.5%
by mass! were partially imbibed. The amount of distilled
water added to seeds ~72 ml to 0.2 g corresponding to a 1:2.7
water-to-seed ratio by mass! hydrated them to 0.45 MCf
(MCf is the percent moisture content when seeds are fully
hydrated!. At 0.45 MCf seeds are both hydrated and in an
aerobic condition.
Low quality seeds produce more EtOH and acetaldehyde
than high quality seeds; this is due to fermentation associated
with seed ageing.3 Acetaldehyde, an intermediate compound
in the formation of EtOH is expected to rise initially and then
decrease with time after hydration. Most measurements are
made after 6 and more commonly 24 h after hydration.3
However, this article reports LPAS measurements of EtOH
and acetaldehyde after only 3 h of imbibition.
A. LPAS
The PAS study was performed using three resonant ~1.3
kHz! PA cells ~the volume of each was 26 ml! placed behind
one another and inside the cavity of a cryogenic CO laser the
intensity of which was modulated by a mechanical chopper.
Imbibed seeds of different ages were distributed in three
separate glass ‘‘reservoirs;’’ each of them was connected
with one PA cell. The transport of volatiles accumulated in
the headspace above the seeds towards the PA cell was
achieved by a flow ~2 l/h! of conditioned air.
During the initial 3 h of imbibition ~the uptake of liquid
water by seeds was completed! the PA cells were flushed
continuously with dry air. Then reservoirs were connected to
PA cells and the carrier gas diverted to flow above the seeds.
The PA signals were measured at six preselected CO laser
lines: three of them coincided with the absorption lines of
acetaldehyde, EtOH, and water, respectively, while the remaining
ones were used to estimate the level of a background
signal. The measuring sequence implied tuning of the
laser, optimization of power, and recording of PA signals
from either of the three cells; this sequence was repeated
three times. What follows is the measurement of laser power,
averaging, and normalization of PA signals. After 40 s the
laser is tuned to another emission line and the whole procedure
repeated; present resolution is 4 min. The interference
of longer alcohols and of other large molecules was  avoided by using the cold trap. The response of the LPAS
system was calibrated using a 10 ppmv mixture of ethanol in
nitrogen.
B. FTIR
 Unlike LPAS that operates in the flow through regime,
GC and FTIR use a closed system that requires ample quantities
of air because seeds need oxygen to respire. If for a
given weight of seeds the headspace above the seeds is too
small, oxygen will be depleted ~ anaerobic fermentation!
 leading to substantial production of EtOH even from high
quality seeds. Accommodating 0.2 g seeds within 10 ml air
space is usually recommended.
Three homemade cylindrical FTIR cells ~ 125 ml each!
 were constructed from Pyrex glass and sealed with a pair of
KCl windows. To reach the targeted 0.45 MCf  each cell was
loaded with 2 g seeds ~ aged for either 0, 2, or 4 weeks!  and
720 m l distilled water added. Under these conditions the
above-mentioned criterion ~ 0.2 g seeds within 10 ml air
space!  for avoiding hypoxia is met. The concentration of
EtOH was monitored at 1394.22 cm21 ; at this wave number
the absorption is quite strong ~ absorption coefficient of EtOH
vapor is 17 atm21  cm21! .
C. Gas chromatography
 Seeds were hydrated to 0.45 MCf ~ 0.2 g seeds added to
72 m l distilled water!  and kept in a 10 ml vial. Following
imbibition seeds were incubated and agitated for 10 min in
the glass container maintained at 60 °C. Two millilitres of the
headspace ~ above the seeds!  were then withdrawn and injected
on DB Carbowax GC column. 