MATERIAL ANDMETHODS
Materials
Ovalbumin was purchased from Sigma (A5503) (St. Louis, MO,
USA). Potatoes (cultivar Seresta, harvest October 2007) were
provided by AVEBE BA (Foxhol, The Netherlands). Fresh bovine
milk was obtained from a local experimental farm (De Ossenkamp,
Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands). Hyland
soybeans (non-GMO) were supplied by Fa. LI Frank (Twello, The
Netherlands). All reagents were of analytical grade and purchased
from Sigma or Merck.
Protein purification
β-Lactoglobulin was isolated from fresh bovine milk as described
by de Jongh and coworkers.36 The genetic variants A and B
were found to be present in the purified β-lactoglobulin in
approximately equal amounts as determined by matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry.
Glycinin was prepared as described previously.37 Patatin was
isolated from potato juice according to the procedure described
previously,29 except that gel filtration was realized on a Superdex
200 column instead of a Superdex 75 column. β-Lactoglobulin,
patatin, and glycinin were desalted by dialysis/diafiltration against
distilled water. All samples were freeze-dried after desalting and
stored at −20 ◦C.
Chemical characterization of proteins
Nitrogen content
Nitrogen content was determined using the Dumas method with
anNA2100 protein nitrogen analyzer (CE Instruments, Milan, Italy).
The N-factors used to convert nitrogen content to protein content
are indicated in Table 1.
Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE)
The purity of the proteins was determined by SDS-PAGE.
Electrophoresis was performed on a Phastsystem (GE Healthcare
Bio-Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden)with a homogeneous 20 gel, using
the instructions of the manufacturer. Samples (3 mg mL−1) were
dissolved in sample buffer (1 : 1) in the presence and absence of β-
mercaptoethanol (2.5% v/v). Thegelswere stainedwithCoomassie
Blue R-250 (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden). The proteinmolecular weight marker kit (SM0431) was from Fermentas
(Burlington, Ontario, Canada). The obtained results showed that
all protein samples were >95% pure (data not shown).
Conductivity measurement
The conductivity of protein suspensions at different concentrations
was measured with a conductivity cell (WTW, Weilheim,
Germany). For this experiment proteins were suspended in distilled
water (pH 7.0, 27 ◦C).
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
Protein unfolding was studied using a VP-DSC MicroCalorimer
(MicroCal Inc., Northampton, MA, USA). Thermograms were
recorded from 20 to 100 ◦C at a heating rate of 1 K min−1.
Protein samples were dissolved in 6 mmol L−1 sodium phosphate
buffer (pH 7.0) with or without 90 mmol L−1 NaCl (yielding
final ionic strengths of 100 and 10 mmol L−1, respectively)
and further dialyzed against the same respective buffer for at
least 1 h. The protein concentration was determined from the
absorbance at 280 nm (using the molar extinction coefficients
in Table 1) and adjusted to the required value with the dialysis
buffer (patatin 0.04 mmol L−1, β-lactoglobulin 0.273 mmol L−1,
ovalbumin 0.055 mmol L−1). For glycinin the concentration was
corrected based on the nitrogen content determined with Dumas
(glycinin 0.057 mmol L−1). These concentrations were chosen to
get a good signal by DSC. These measurements were performed
to establish the denaturation temperature (Td) of the different
proteins,whichwaslaterusedto establish theheating temperature
for gel formation.
Exposed hydrophobicity
The hydrophobic exposure of proteins is difficult to assess in
an absolute manner. Hydrophobic chromatography was used
to obtain a relative expression of hydrophobic exposure of
the different proteins. A Phenyl FF column (high sub, 5 mL;
GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences) was used, with elution buffers A:
10 mmol L−1 BisTris-HCl, pH 7.0; B: buffer A + 0.85 mol L−1
ammonium sulfate; and C: buffer A + 1mol L−1 ammonium
sulfate. In those cases where a protein was found to be insoluble in
1mol L−1 ammonium sulfate, buffer B was used instead of buffer
C. The column was equilibrated in buffer C and samples were
prepared by dissolving 10 mg in 1 mL buffer C and centrifuging
for 5 min at 12 000 rpm (Eppendorf centrifuge). A flow rate of
5mLmin−1 wasusedandeachexperimentstartedbyequilibration
of the column with 5 column volumes (CV), followed by injection
of 500 μL sample, followed by 2 CV of buffer C. The samples were
then eluted with a gradient from 100% buffer C to 100% buffer
A, over a length of 20 CV, followed by 2 CV of 100% buffer A.
Detection took place at 280 nm and the exposed hydrophobicity
is expressed as one minus the molarity of ammonium sulfate,
where the highest absorbance is measured in the detector (this
approach has also been used by Franco et al.38).
Physical characterization of gels
Sample preparation
Proteins were dispersed at 18% (w/v) concentrations and the pH
was adjusted to pH 7.0. After 1 h stirring at 20 ◦C, the dispersions
were centrifuged (20 min, 25 000 °ø g, 20◦C) to remove any nondissolved
proteins. The protein concentration of the supernatant
was determined by the Dumas method. For further experiments
protein solutions were prepared by diluting the supernatant to
the desired concentrations.
Preparation of heat-induced protein gels at neutral pH
In order to have similar kinetics of unfolding, the protein solutions
(pH 7.0) were heated from 20 ◦C to (Td + 10) ◦C at a rate of
1 K min−1. The solutions were kept at (Td + 10) ◦C for 30min and
then cooled to 20 ◦C at a rate of 1 Kmin−1.
Determination of the minimum gel concentration at different
ionic strengths
The minimum gel concentration was determined by preparing
small aliquots (0.3 mL) of protein solutions ranging in concentration
from1%to 15%(w/w)protein. The ionic strengthwas adjusted
(to 10–200 mmol L−1) by adding 0.25, 0.5 or 1 mol L−1 stock solutions
of NaCl. Samples in sealed Eppendorf tubes were heated as
described above. The heating temperature was not changed with
different ionic strength (I), since both our own experimental data
(Fig. 3) and literature data12,39 show very limited effects of I on
Td. Whether or not a gel was formed was determined visually by
turning the Eppendorf vials upside down after the samples were
cooled to 20 ◦C. Samples that did not flow were considered to be
‘gelled’.
Rheological characterization of the gels
The visco-elastic properties of protein solutions at different
protein concentrations were monitored during heat-induced
gel formation by dynamic measurements in a rheometer. The
rheological properties of the gel were characterized by the elastic
modulus (G) and the viscous modulus (G). In addition, the
temperature at which gelation starts (Tonset gel) was used and was
defined as the temperature at which G
> G.
Quantitativemeasurements of the visco-elastic propertiesof the
gels were made using small-amplitude oscillatory measurements
on a Paar Physica MCR 300 (Anton Paar, Graz, Austria) stresscontrolled
rheometer, using a concentric cylinder geometry (inner
and outer cylinder diameter 9.99 and 10.84 mm, respectively).
Protein solutions (6–20% w/w) were prepared by diluting stock
solutions (made in distilled water), with distilled water or with
a 2mol L−1 NaCl stock solution (to reach a final ionic strength
of 0.1 mol L−1). Samples (1 mL) were placed in the cup of the
rheometer. After lowering the inner cylinder, the top surface of the
liquidwas covered with paraffin oil to prevent sample dehydration
during heating.ThesampleswereheatedandcooledusingaPeltier
element, under the same conditions as described above. During
thewhole heating cycle, visco-elastic propertieswere measured at
constant strain (1%) and frequency (1 Hz). These low values were
chosen to ensure that all measurements were performed in the
linear regime. After 30 min rest at 20 ◦C, a frequency sweep and a
strain sweep were performed. First, the frequency was increased
logarithmically from 0.01 to 50 Hz, at a strain of 1%. After 30 min
rest the strain was increased logarithmically from 0.1 to 1000%, at
a frequency of 1 Hz.