2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Eucalyptus alcohol insoluble solids (AIS) and a purified xylan polymer containing
4-O-methyl-d-glucopyranosyl uronic acid and acetyl groups (Ac-MeGlcAXylan)
were obtained as described previously [28]. Eucalyptus wood AIS consist mainly
of cellulose and heteroxylan, which are entangled in a complex and insoluble
cell wall network. The purified polymer Ac-MeGlcAXylan from Eucalyptus
wood, is a high molecular weight and partly insoluble xylan, decorated with
acetyl groups at positions O-2 and/or O-3 and with 4-O-methyl-d-glucopyranosyl
uronic acid (MeGlcA) at position O-2 of xylosyl residues [23]. Neutral acetylated
xylo-oligosaccharides (AcXOS; with a DP of 4–12 xylosyl residues) were
obtained from thermally processed Eucalyptus wood [13]. These AcXOS are purified
xylo-oligosaccharides, in which xylosyl residues are solely substituted by acetyl
groups [38]. The monosaccharide compositions of these substrates are presented in
Table 1.
Methyl ferulate, sinapate and caffeate were purchased from Apin Chemicals Ltd.
(UK) and p-nitrophenyl-acetate was obtained from Fluka (Sigma–Aldrich, Germany).
2.2. Cloning of acetyl xylan esterase encoding genes
The ascomycetous fungus C. lucknowense C1 (accession number: VKM F-3500D
of the All-Russian Collection of Microorganisms of Russian Academy of Sciences) was
used for the production of hemicellulases. The full genome of C1 has been sequenced
and revealed many genes encoding for cellulases, hemicellulases and accessory
enzymes [36]. Annotated genes, encoding for the putative acetyl xylan esterases
Axe2 and Axe3, have been cloned into a specially designed C1-expression host
[39] that allows production of relatively pure enzyme. The amino acid sequences
have been deposited at GenBank with the accession numbers HQ324256 (Axe2)
and HQ324257 (Axe3). The strains, containing extra copies of the axe2 or axe3 gene
were grown aerobically in 2 L fermentors in mineral medium, containing glucose
as carbon source, ammonium sulfate as nitrogen source and trace elements for the
essential salts. Growth is performed under glucose limitation at pH 6.0 and 32 ◦C
[39].
After fermentation, the supernatants containing the enzymes were tested on
acetylated substrates and both Axe2 and Axe3 showed activity towards acetylated
xylan releasing acetic acid.
2.3. SDS-PAGE
SDS-PAGE, under reducing conditions, was performed with a Pharmacia Phast-
System (GE Healthcare) according to the instructions of the manufacturer using
Gradient 8–25% Phastgels (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). Gels were stained
according to the Coomassie blue staining procedure provided by the manufacturer.
2.4. Purification of Axe2 and Axe3
An Akta purifier chromatography system and column used for the protein purification
were obtained from GE Healthcare. The eluates were monitored at 215, 280
and 320 nm. The fermentation supernatants containing Axe2 or Axe3 were applied
to a Superdex 75 gel filtration column (10 mm
°ø
300 mm), equilibrated with 50 mM
sodium acetate buffer, pH 5.0, containing 50 mM NaCl. The proteins were eluted
using the same buffer at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min.
Two protein peaks were eluted from the column for both enzyme samples: the
activity assays used showed that the first peak did not contain any esterase activity,
while the second peak showed high activity towards AcXOS in both cases. Fractions
(0.5 mL), containing esterase activity, were collected, pooled and were subsequently
stored in small aliquots at
−20 ◦C.
SDS-PAGE of peak 1 showed that the proteins represented the host proteins
(based on a background control), while hardly any protein was detected in peak
2 using SDS-PAGE. The detection limit of proteins using Coomassie blue staining
is very low and the dye binding a certain amount of proteins differs highly from
one protein to another [40]. MALDI-TOF MS was performed to determine the Mw
of the enzymes. The enzymes were found to have a molecular mass of 23.6 and
33.6 kDa for Axe2 and Axe3, respectively, which are very similar to the sequencebased
molecular masses (22.3 and 31.5 kDa, respectively).
2.5. Enzyme assays
The esterase activity of the acetyl xylan esterase towards AIS, Ac-MeGlcAXylan
and AcXOS from Eucalyptus wood dispersed in millipore water was measured using
a pH stat. The reaction mixture (5 mL) consisted of AIS (2 mg), Ac-MeGlcAXylan
(1 mg) or AcXOS (1 mg) and an enzyme dose of 5 g protein per mg of substrate.
The acetic acid released was continuously back-titrated with 1 mM NaOH to the
desired pH (pH range: 4.5–7.5), employing a thermostated autotitration system (719
S Titrino, Metrohm Ion analysis, Metrohm Ltd., Herisau, Switzerland). Temperature
was controlled at the desired level (35–60 ◦C). The reactions were continued until
the end point was reached, resulting in typical incubation times of 4–6 h, depending
on the substrate used. Temperature and pH optima were determined using the pHstat
and AcXOS as the substrate. The specific activity was defined as 1 mol of acetic
acid released per min per mg protein. The pH optimum was determined within
the pH range 4.0–7.5 at 35 ◦C. pHs higher than 7.5 were not tested due to autohydrolysis
of the ester linkage. The temperature profile was determined within the
temperature range 35–60 ◦C at the optimum pH determined. The specific activities
were determined after 5 min of incubation.
Hydrolysis products of Axe2 and Axe3 were monitored using MALDI-TOF MS
and CE-LIF. In these experiments, substrate (10 mg/mL) and enzyme (5 g enzyme
per mg substrate) were incubated in a 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.0 using
a micro mixer (700 rpm) for a defined time at 40 ◦C and the reaction was successively
stopped by boiling (10 min). For CE analysis, the oligosaccharides were derivatized
with the fluorescent APTS before incubation with the enzyme. The samples were
stored at
−20 ◦C until the analysis took place.
2.6. MALDI-TOF MS
The hydrolysis products of AcXOS were analyzed using MALDI-TOF MS, as
described previously [41]. The molecular masses of the purified enzymes were
determined using MALDI-TOF MS, as described by Pouvreau et al. [42].
2.7. CE-LIF
Samples for CE-LIF were prepared using the ProteomeLab Carbohydrate Labeling
and Analysis Kit (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA). The samples were derivatized
with the fluorescent APTS overnight at room temperature and analyzed as described
previously [43]. The enzyme incubation (40 ◦C and pH 7.0) took place after the
oligosaccharides were labeled. CE–MS was performed as described previously [41].