Materials and methods
Materials
Acetate buffer and NaCl solutions were prepared from analytical grade chemicals and deionised water. Bovine b-lactoglobulin was purified using a non-denaturing method as described previously (de Jongh, Gro¨neveld, & de Groot, 2001) Ovalbumin was isolated as described before (Wierenga, Meinders, Egmond, Voragen, & de Jongh, 2003) Lysozyme L-6878 was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, Missouri, USA) and used without further purification. Stock solutions of 0.2 mg/ml protein were prepared by dissolving
protein in deionised water and subsequently diluting with concentrated acetate buffer solution to 5 mM acetate, ionic strength 1 mM, pH 4.5. The protein solutions were kept at K40 8C until further use. For pH dependency experiments, protein was dissolved in water, adjusted to the desired pH values with concentrated HCl or NaOH and subsequently the conductivity was set at 0.4 mS/cm in all samples by addition of NaCl solution. For the experiments with various proteins and polysaccharides at pH 7, a 5 mM phosphate buffer with an ionic strength of 8 mM was used. The corresponding samples at pH 4.5 were adjusted to this ionic strength with NaCl. Two pectins with different degree of methyl esterification: low methoxyl pectin (LMP) and high methoxyl pectin (HMP) were
used (CP Celko, Copenhagen, Denmark; Table 1). Only the non-methylated galacturonic acid monomers have a free carboxyl group (weak acid, pKaw3.5). i-Carrageenan (Copenhagen Pectin A/S, Lille Skensved, Denmark) has one sulphate group (strong acid, pKaw2) per monosaccharide. Polysaccharide solutions were prepared by first wetting the powder with ethanol (only for i-carrageenan no ethanol was used), than dissolving in buffer and subsequently heating at 70 8C for 30 min. After overnight storage in the fridge, the samples were centrifuged at 6000g at room temperature for 10 min. Number averaged molecular weight (Mn) and polydispersity of the
polysaccharides were determined using size exclusion chromatography (5000, 4000, 3000 PW columns and 0.2 M sodium nitrate as eluens, flow rate 0.5 mL/min, refractive index detection) in combination with multi-angle laser light scattering (DAWN-F MALLS photometer, equipped with K5 flow cell and a linearly polarized He–Ne laser light source, 14 detectors used). Mn and Mw were calculated using Astra for Windows, using a dn/dc of 0.152 mL/g).
Drop tensiometry
Surface tension as a function of time was measured for single component and mixed solutions of protein and polysaccharide using an automated drop tensiometer (ITCONCEPT, Longessaigne, France). Samples were freshly prepared for each experiment and equilibrated for 30 min. Each experiment started with a clean interface of a newly formed air bubble (7 mL) in a cuvette containing the sample solution. Surface tension was determined by bubble shape analysis  The setup is described in detail elsewhere (Benjamins, Cagna, & Lucassen-Reynders, 1996 ). Temperature was controlled at 22 8 C. All results are presented in terms of surface pressure
PZg0Kg , where g0  is the surface tension of the solvent (72 mN/m) and g  is the measured surface tension.
 Dynamic light scattering
 Second cumulant diffusion coefficients of the pectins and the b -lactoglobulin/pectin complexes were determined by dynamic light scattering (Berne & Pecora, 1976 ), using an ALV light scattering instrument equipped with a 400 mW argon laser tuned at a wavelength of 514.5 nm, as described by van der Burgh, de Keizer, and Cohen Stuart (2004) . Hydrodynamic radii were calculated according to Stokes– Einstein, assuming that the pectin molecules and the complexes are spherical. Temperature was controlled at
20 8 C. Protein concentration was 0.1 g/L for all samples and pectin concentrations varied from protein/pectin mixing ratio 0–15 w/w.